RELATIVITY


ALBERT  EINSTEIN


^OFPR?S^
(  MAY  2  1933  J
X^OeiCALSt)^^


Division


Section


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2019  with  funding  from
Princeton  Theological  Seminary  Library


https://archive.org/details/rneaningofrelativ00eins_0


THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


THE  MEANING  OF


RELATIVITY^'


OF  PRlNi


FOUR  LECTURES  DELIVERED  A
PRINCETON  UNIVERSITY,  MAY,  1921


A


VUY  9  10'

‘  r\  I  AJ


//£

<^0GIGAL8^


BY  /

ALBERT  EINSTEIN


WITH  FOUR  DIAGRAMS


PRINCETON

PRINCETON  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

1923


Copyright  1922
Princeton  University  Press
Published  iq22


PRINTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN
AT  THE  ABERDEEN  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
ABERDEEN


Note. — The  translation  of  these  lectures  into  English
was  made  by  Edwin  Plimpton  Adams,  Professor
of  Physics  in  Princeton  University


CONTENTS


LECTURE  I

Space  and  Time  in  Pre-Relativity  Physics


LECTURE  II

The  Theory  of  Special  Relativity


LECTURE  III

The  General  Theory  of  Relativity


LECTURE  IV

The  General  Theory  of  Relativity  ( co?itinued )


Index .


THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


LECTURE  I


SPACE  AND  TIME  IN  PRE-RELATIVITY

PHYSICS


HE  theory  of  relativity  is  intimately  connected  with


-1  the  theory  of  space  and  time.  I  shall  therefore  begin
with  a  brief  investigation  of  the  origin  of  our  ideas  of  space
and  time,  although  in  doing  so  I  know  that  I  introduce  a
controversial  subject.  The  object  of  all  science,  whether
natural  science  or  psychology,  is  to  co-ordinate  our  experi¬
ences  and  to  bring  them  into  a  logical  system.  How  are
our  customary  ideas  of  space  and  time  related  to  the
character  of  our  experiences  ?

The  experiences  of  an  individual  appear  to  us  arranged
in  a  series  of  events  ;  in  this  series  the  single  events  which
we  remember  appear  to  be  ordered  according  to  the  criterion
of  “  earlier  ”  and  “  later,”  which  cannot  be  analysed  further.
There  exists,  therefore,  for  the  individual,  an  I -time,  or
subjective  time.  This  in  itself  is  not  measurable.  I  can,
indeed,  associate  numbers  with  the  events,  in  such  a  way
that  a  greater  number  is  associated  with  the  later  event
than  with  an  earlier  one  ;  but  the  nature  of  this  association
may  be  quite  arbitrary.  This  association  I  can  define  by
means  of  a  clock  by  comparing  the  order  of  events  furnished


i


2  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


by  the  clock  with  the  order  of  the  given  series  of  events.
We  understand  by  a  clock  something  which  provides  a
series  of  events  which  can  be  counted,  and  which  has  other
properties  of  which  we  shall  speak  later.

By  the  aid  of  speech  different  individuals  can,  to  a  certain
extent,  compare  their  experiences.  In  this  way  it  is  shown
that  certain  sense  perceptions  of  different  individuals
correspond  to  each  other,  while  for  other  sense  perceptions
no  such  correspondence  can  be  established.  We  are  ac¬
customed  to  regard  as  real  those  sense  perceptions  which
are  common  to  different  individuals,  and  which  therefore
are,  in  a  measure,  impersonal.  The  natural  sciences,  and
in  particular,  the  most  fundamental  of  them,  physics,  deal
with  such  sense  perceptions.  The  conception  of  physical
bodies,  in  particular  of  rigid  bodies,  is  a  relatively  constant
complex  of  such  sense  perceptions.  A  clock  is  also  a  body,
or  a  system,  in  the  same  sense,  with  the  additional  property
that  the  series  of  events  which  it  counts  is  formed  of
elements  all  of  which  can  be  regarded  as  equal.

The  only  justification  for  our  concepts  and  system  of
concepts  is  that  they  serve  to  represent  the  complex  of
our  experiences;  beyond  this  they  have  no  legitimacy.  I
am  convinced  that  the  philosophers  have  had  a  harmful
effect  upon  the  progress  of  scientific  thinking  in  removing
certain  fundamental  concepts  from  the  domain  of  empiric¬
ism,  where  they  are  under  our  control,  to  the  intangible
heights  of  the  a  priori.  For  even  if  it  should  appear  that
the  universe  of  ideas  cannot  be  deduced  from  experience
by  logical  means,  but  is,  in  a  sense,  a  creation  of  the  human
mind,  without  which  no  science  is  possible,  nevertheless


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS


3


this  universe  of  ideas  is  just  as  little  independent  of  the
nature  of  our  experiences  as  clothes  are  of  the  form  of
the  human  body.  This  is  particularly  true  of  our  con¬
cepts  of  time  and  space,  which  physicists  have  been
obliged  by  the  facts  to  bring  down  from  the  Olympus  of
the  a  priori  in  order  to  adjust  them  and  put  them  in  a
serviceable  condition.

We  now  come  to  our  concepts  and  judgments  of  space.
It  is  essential  here  also  to  pay  strict  attention  to  the
relation  of  experience  to  our  concepts.  It  seems  to  me
that  Poincare  clearly  recognized  the  truth  in  the  account
he  gave  in  his  book,  “  La  Science  et  l’Hypothese.”
Among  all  the  changes  which  we  can  perceive  in  a  rigid
body  those  are  marked  by  their  simplicity  which  can  be
made  reversibly  by  an  arbitrary  motion  of  the  body;
Poincare  calls  these,  changes  in  position.  By  means  of
simple  changes  in  position  we  can  bring  two  bodies  into
contact.  The  theorems  of  congruence,  fundamental  in
geometry,  have  to  do  with  the  laws  that  govern  such
changes  in  position.  For  the  concept  of  space  the  follow¬
ing  seems  essential.  We  can  form  new  bodies  by  bringing
bodies  B,  C,  ...  up  to  body  A  ;  we  say  that  we  continue
body  A.  We  can  continue  body  A  in  such  a  way  that
it  comes  into  contact  with  any  other  body,  X.  The
ensemble  of  all  continuations  of  body  A  we  can  designate
as  the  “space  of  the  body  A.”  Then  it  is  true  that  all
bodies  are  in  the  “space  of  the  (arbitrarily  chosen)  body
AA  In  this  sense  we  cannot  speak  of  space  in  the
abstract,  but  only  of  the  “space  belonging  to  a  body  AA
The  earth’s  crust  plays  such  a  dominant  role  in  our  daily


4  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


life  in  judging  the  relative  positions  of  bodies  that  it  has
led  to  an  abstract  conception  of  space  which  certainly
cannot  be  defended.  In  order  to  free  ourselves  from  this
fatal  error  we  shall  speak  only  of  “bodies  of  reference,”
or  “  space  of  reference.”  It  was  only  through  the  theory
of  general  relativity  that  refinement  of  these  concepts
became  necessary,  as  we  shall  see  later.

I  shall  not  go  into  detail  concerning  those  properties
of  the  space  of  reference  which  lead  to  our  conceiving
points  as  elements  of  space,  and  space  as  a  continuum.
Nor  shall  I  attempt  to  analyse  further  the  properties  of
space  which  justify  the  conception  of  continuous  series
of  points,  or  lines.  If  these  concepts  are  assumed,  together
with  their  relation  to  the  solid  bodies  of  experience,  then
it  is  easy  to  say  what  we  mean  by  the  three-dimensionality
of  space ;  to  each  point  three  numbers,  xv  x2,  x3  (co¬
ordinates),  may  be  associated,  in  such  a  way  that  this
association  is  uniquely  reciprocal,  and  that  xv  xv  and  x2
vary  continuously  when  the  point  describes  a  continuous
series  of  points  (a  line).

It  is  assumed  in  pre-relativity  physics  that  the  laws  of
the  orientation  of  ideal  rigid  bodies  are  consistent  with
Euclidean  geometry.  What  this  means  may  be  expressed
as  follows :  Two  points  marked  on  a  rigid  body  form
an  interval.  Such  an  interval  can  be  oriented  at  rest,
relatively  to  our  space  of  reference,  in  a  multiplicity  of
ways.  If,  now,  the  points  of  this  space  can  be  referred
to  co-ordinates^,  xv  xv  in  such  a  way  that  the  differences
of  the  co-ordinates,  Axv  Aq,  Ar3,  of  the  two  ends  of  the
interval  furnish  the  same  sum  of  squares,

s 2  =  A*i2  +  Ax22  +  kx3  .  .  (i)


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS


5


for  every  orientation  of  the  interval,  then  the  space  of
reference  is  called  Euclidean,  and  the  co-ordinates
Cartesian.*  It  is  sufficient,  indeed,  to  make  this  assump¬
tion  in  the  limit  for  an  infinitely  small  interval.  Involved
in  this  assumption  there  are  some  which  are  rather  less
special,  to  which  we  must  call  attention  on  account  of
their  fundamental  significance.  In  the  first  place,  it  is
assumed  that  one  can  move  an  ideal  rigid  body  in  an
arbitrary  manner.  In  the  second  place,  it  is  assumed
that  the  behaviour  of  ideal  rigid  bodies  towards  orienta¬
tion  is  independent  of  the  material  of  the  bodies  and  their
changes  of  position,  in  the  sense  that  if  two  intervals  can
once  be  brought  into  coincidence,  they  can  always  and
everywhere  be  brought  into  coincidence.  Both  of  these
assumptions,  which  are  of  fundamental  importance  for
geometry  and  especially  for  physical  measurements,
naturally  arise  from  experience  ;  in  the  theory  of  general
relativity  their  validity  needs  to  be  assumed  only  for
bodies  and  spaces  of  reference  which  are  infinitely  small
compared  to  astronomical  dimensions.

The  quantity  s  we  call  the  length  of  the  interval.  In
order  that  this  may  be  uniquely  determined  it  is  necessary
to  fix  arbitrarily  the  length  of  a  definite  interval ;  for
example,  we  can  put  it  equal  to  I  (unit  of  length).  Then
the  lengths  of  all  other  intervals  may  be  determined.  If
we  make  the  xv  linearly  dependent  upon  a  parameter  X,

xv  =  dv  +  X^„,

*  This  relation  must  hold  for  an  arbitrary  choice  of  the  origin  and  of  the
direction  (ratios  Axl  :  Ax2  :  Ax3)  of  the  interval.


6  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


we  obtain  a  line  which  has  all  the  properties  of  the  straight
lines  of  the  Euclidean  geometry.  In  particular,  it  easily
follows  that  by  laying  off  n  times  the  interval  n  upon  a
straight  line,  an  interval  of  length  n's  is  obtained.  A
length,  therefore,  means  the  result  of  a  measurement
carried  out  along  a  straight  line  by  means  of  a  unit
measuring  rod.  It  has  a  significance  which  is  as  inde¬
pendent  of  the  system  of  co-ordinates  as  that  of  a  straight
line,  as  will  appear  in  the  sequel.

We  come  now  to  a  train  of  thought  which  plays  an
analogous  role  in  the  theories  of  special  and  general
relativity.  We  ask  the  question  :  besides  the  Cartesian
co-ordinates  which  we  have  used  are  there  other  equivalent
co-ordinates  ?  An  interval  has  a  physical  meaning  which
is  independent  of  the  choice  of  co-ordinates ;  and  so  has
the  spherical  surface  which  we  obtain  as  the  locus  of  the
end  points  of  all  equal  intervals  that  we  lay  off  from  an
arbitrary  point  of  our  space  of  reference.  If  xv  as  well  as
x  v  {y  from  I  to  3)  are  Cartesian  co-ordinates  of  our  space
of  reference,  then  the  spherical  surface  will  be  expressed
in  our  two  systems  of  co-ordinates  by  the  equations

A^2  =  const.  .  .  (2)

=  const.  .  .  .  (2a)

How  must  the  x v  be  expressed  in  terms  of  thexv  in  order
that  equations  (2)  and  (2a)  may  be  equivalent  to  each
other  ?  Regarding  the  x  v  expressed  as  functions  of  the
xvy  we  can  write,  by  Taylor’s  theorem,  for  small  values  of
the  Axu,


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS


7


AY.  =  J


dx.


Ax„


i .

+  5.


a/3


c)Vv


Axai\xp  .


If  we  substitute  (2a)  in  this  equation  and  compare  with
(i),  we  see  that  the  x  v  must  be  linear  functions  of  the  xv.
If  we  therefore  put

x  v  —  av  +  bvaxa  .  .  .  (3)

a

or  Ar'„  =  ^<Ara  .  •  •  •  (3a)


then  the  equivalence  of  equations  (2)  and  (2a)  is  expressed
in  the  form


=  \^Jix2  (X  independent  of  Axv)  .  (2b)

It  therefore  follows  that  X  must  be  a  constant.  If  we  put
X  =  1,  (2b)  and  (3a)  furnish  the  conditions


j3  ^aj8  •  •  •  (4)


in  which  Sai3  =  1,  cr  8af}  =  o,  according  as  a  =  /3  or
a  /3.  The  conditions  (4)  are  called  the  conditions  of  ortho¬
gonality,  and  the  transformations  (3),  (4),  linear  orthogonal

transformations.  If  we  stipulate  that  s'1  =  ^Ax2  shall  be

equal  to  the  square  of  the  length  in  every  system  of
co-ordinates,  and  if  we  always  measure  with  the  same  unit
scale,  then  X  must  be  equal  to  1.  Therefore  the  linear
orthogonal  transformations  are  the  only  ones  by  means  of
which  we  can  pass  from  one  Cartesian  system  of  co¬
ordinates  in  our  space  of  reference  to  another.  We  see


8  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


that  in  applying  such  transformations  the  equations  of
a  straight  line  become  equations  of  a  straight  line.
Reversing  equations  (3a)  by  multiplying  both  sides  by  bvfi
and  summing  for  all  the  vs,  we  obtain

v  =  ^ b vofo a.  ~  /  $ap/\Xa  =  l\X p  .  (5)

va  a

The  same  coefficients,  b,  also  determine  the  inverse
substitution  of  Axv.  Geometrically,  bva  is  the  cosine  of  the
angle  between  the  x  v  axis  and  the  ;ra  axis.

To  sum  up,  we  can  say  that  in  the  Euclidean  geometry
there  are  (in  a  given  space  of  reference)  preferred  systems
of  co-ordinates,  the  Cartesian  systems,  which  transform
into  each  other  by  linear  orthogonal  transformations.
The  distance  s  between  two  points  of  our  space  of
reference,  measured  by  a  measuring  rod,  is  expressed  in
such  co-ordinates  in  a  particularly  simple  manner.  The
whole  of  geometry  may  be  founded  upon  this  conception
of  distance.  In  the  present  treatment,  geometry  is
related  to  actual  things  (rigid  bodies),  and  its  theorems
are  statements  concerning  the  behaviour  of  these  things,
which  may  prove  to  be  true  or  false.

One  is  ordinarily  accustomed  to  study  geometry
divorced  from  any  relation  between  its  concepts  and
experience.  There  are  advantages  in  isolating  that
which  is  purely  logical  and  independent  of  what  is,  in
principle,  incomplete  empiricism.  This  is  satisfactory  to
the  pure  mathematician.  He  is  satisfied  if  he  can  deduce
his  theorems  from  axioms  correctly,  that  is,  without
errors  of  logic.  The  question  as  to  whether  Euclidean


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS


9


geometry  is  true  or  not  does  not  concern  him.  But  for
our  purpose  it  is  necessary  to  associate  the  fundamental
concepts  of  geometry  with  natural  objects  ;  without  such
an  association  geometry  is  worthless  for  the  physicist.
The  physicist  is  concerned  with  the  question  as  to
whether  the  theorems  of  geometry  are  true  or  not.  That
Euclidean  geometry,  from  this  point  of  view,  affirms
something  more  than  the  mere  deductions  derived
logically  from  definitions  may  be  seen  from  the  following
simple  consideration.


Between  n  points  of  space  there  are


distances,


;  between  these  and  the  3 n  co-ordinates  we  have  the
relations


S^v“  —  X\ (t-))2  *1"  C*-2(M)  '*2(»'))  +  •  •  •

n(n  -  1)  .

From  these  -  equations  the  3^  co-ordinates

may  be  eliminated,  and  from  this  elimination  at  least
n(n  -  1)

- -  3 n  equations  in  the  s will  result.*  Since

the  are  measurable  quantities,  and  by  definition  are
independent  of  each  other,  these  relations  between  the
s^v  are  not  necessary  a  priori.

From  the  foregoing  it  is  evident  that  the  equations  of
transformation  (3),  (4)  have  a  fundamental  significance  in
Euclidean  geometry,  in  that  they  govern  the  transforma¬
tion  from  one  Cartesian  system  of  co-ordinates  to  another.
The  Cartesian  systems  of  co-ordinates  are  characterized

n(n  -  1)


In  reality  there  are


-  3«  +  6  equations.


10  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


by  the  property  that  in  them  the  measurable  distance
between  two  points,  s ,  is  expressed  by  the  equation

If  K(Xv)  and  K\Xv)  are  two  Cartesian  systems  of  co¬
ordinates,  then

^>Auy2  =  ^Aa'V2.

The  right-hand  side  is  identically  equal  to  the  left-hand


side  on  account  of  the  equations  of  the  linear  orthogonal
transformation,  and  the  right-hand  side  differs  from  the
left-hand  side  only  in  that  the  xv  are  replaced  by  the  x  v.

This  is  expressed  by  the  statement  that  is  an

invariant  with  respect  to  linear  orthogonal  transforma¬
tions.  It  is  evident  that  in  the  Euclidean  geometry  only
such,  and  all  such,  quantities  have  an  objective  signifi¬
cance,  independent  of  the  particular  choice  of  the  Cartesian
co-ordinates,  as  can  be  expressed  by  an  invariant  with
respect  to  linear  orthogonal  transformations.  This  is  the
reason  that  the  theory  of  invariants,  which  has  to  do  with
the  laws  that  govern  the  form  of  invariants,  is  so  important
for  analytical  geometry.

As  a  second  example  of  a  geometrical  invariant,  con¬
sider  a  volume.  This  is  expressed  by


V  —  j  j  jdz1dx2dx3.

By  means  of  Jacobi’s  theorem  we  may  write


dx \dx \dx 3


ill


ap'i,  x'.2,  x3)
x.2,  x3)


dxYdx2dx3


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS


11


where  the  integrand  in  the  last  integral  is  the  functional
determinant  of  the  x  v  with  respect  to  the  xv,  and  this  by
(3)  is  equal  to  the  determinant  |  b^v  |  of  the  coefficients
of  substitution,  bV0L.  If  we  form  the  determinant  of  the
S,Aa  from  equation  (4),  we  obtain,  by  means  of  the  theorem
of  multiplication  of  determinants,


v


If  we  limit  ourselves  to  those  transformations  which  have
the  determinant  +  I,*  and  only  these  arise  from  con¬
tinuous  variations  of  the  systems  of  co-ordinates,  then  V
is  an  invariant.

Invariants,  however,  are  not  the  only  forms  by  means
of  which  we  can  give  expression  to  the  independence  of
the  particular  choice  of  the  Cartesian  co-ordinates.  Vectors
and  tensors  are  other  forms  of  expression.  Let  us  express
the  fact  that  the  point  with  the  current  co-ordinates  xv  lies
upon  a  straight  line.  We  have


xv  -  Av  =  \BV  (v  from  1  to  3).

Without  limiting  the  generality  we  can  put

]>A.2  =  1.

If  we  multiply  the  equations  by  b^v  (compare  (3a)  and
(5))  and  sum  for  all  the  p’s,  we  get

x  p  —  A  p  =  \B  p

*  There  are  thus  two  kinds  of  Cartesian  systems  which  are  designated
as  “right-handed”  and  “left-handed”  systems.  The  difference  between
these  is  familiar  to  every  physicist  and  engineer.  It  is  interesting  to  note
that  these  two  kinds  of  systems  cannot  be  defined  geometrically,  but  only
the  contrast  between  them.


12  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


where  we  have  written

^0  =  y  bpvBv ;  Ap  =  '^bpvAv.

V  V

These  are  the  equations  of  straight  lines  with  respect
to  a  second  Cartesian  system  of  co-ordinates  K'.  They
have  the  same  form  as  the  equations  with  respect  to  the
original  system  of  co-ordinates.  It  is  therefore  evident
that  straight  lines  have  a  significance  which  is  independent
of  the  system  of  co-ordinates.  Formally,  this  depends
upon  the  fact  that  the  quantities  (xv  -  A v)  -  \BV  are
transformed  as  the  components  of  an  interval,  The

ensemble  of  three  quantities,  defined  for  every  system  of
Cartesian  co-ordinates,  and  which  transform  as  the  com¬
ponents  of  an  interval,  is  called  a  vector.  If  the  three
components  of  a  vector  vanish  for  one  system  of  Cartesian
co-ordinates,  they  vanish  for  all  systems,  because  the  equa¬
tions  of  transformation  are  homogeneous.  We  can  thus
get  the  meaning  of  the  concept  of  a  vector  without  referring
to  a  geometrical  representation.  This  behaviour  of  the
equations  of  a  straight  line  can  be  expressed  by  saying
that  the  equation  of  a  straight  line  is  co-variant  with  respect
to  linear  orthogonal  transformations.

We  shall  now  show  briefly  that  there  are  geometrical
entities  which  lead  to  the  concept  of  tensors.  Let  P0  be
the  centre  of  a  surface  of  the  second  degree,  P  any  point
on  the  surface,  and  the  projections  of  the  interval  P0P
upon  the  co-ordinate  axes.  Then  the  equation  of  the
surface  is


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS


13


In  this,  and  in  analogous  cases,  we  shall  omit  the  sign  of
summation,  and  understand  that  the  summation  is  to  be
carried  out  for  those  indices  that  appear  twice.  We  thus
write  the  equation  of  the  surface

The  quantities  a^v  determine  the  surface  completely,  for
a  given  position  of  the  centre,  with  respect  to  the  chosen
system  of  Cartesian  co-ordinates.  From  the  known  law
of  transformation  for  the  (3a)  for  linear  orthogonal
transformations,  we  easily  find  the  law  of  transformation
for  the  a^v  *  :

^  err  '

This  transformation  is  homogeneous  and  of  the  first  degree
in  the  a^v.  On  account  of  this  transformation,  the  a^v
are  called  components  of  a  tensor  of  the  second  rank  (the
latter  on  account  of  the  double  index).  If  all  the  com¬
ponents,  of  a  tensor  with  respect  to  any  system  of
Cartesian  co-ordinates  vanish,  they  vanish  with  respect  to
every  other  Cartesian  system.  The  form  and  the  position
of  the  surface  of  the  second  degree  is  described  by  this
tensor  (a).

Analytic  tensors  of  higher  rank  (number  of  indices)
may  be  defined.  It  is  possible  and  advantageous  to
regard  vectors  as  tensors  of  rank  1,  and  invariants  (scalars)
as  tensors  of  rank  o.  In  this  respect,  the  problem  of  the
theory  of  invariants  may  be  so  formulated  :  according  to
what  laws  may  new  tensors  be  formed  from  given  tensors  ?

*  The  equation  aVrlV^'r  =  1  may,  by  (5),  be  replaced  by  &’  errb  fxa-bpT^o-^T
=  i,  from  which  the  result  stated  immediately  follows.


14  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


We  shall  consider  these  laws  now,  in  order  to  be  able  to
apply  them  later.  We  shall  deal  first  only  with  the
properties  of  tensors  with  respect  to  the  transformation
from  one  Cartesian  system  to  another  in  the  same  space
of  reference,  by  means  of  linear  orthogonal  transforma¬
tions.  As  the  laws  are  wholly  independent  of  the  number
of  dimensions,  we  shall  leave  this  number,  n,  indefinite  at
first.

Definition.  If  a  figure  is  defined  with  respect  to  every
system  of  Cartesian  co-ordinates  in  a  space  of  reference  of
n  dimensions  by  the  n a  numbers  A^p  .  .  .  (a  =  number
of  indices),  then  these  numbers  are  the  components  of  a
tensor  of  rank  a  if  the  transformation  law  is


i u.'v'p'  •  *  •  ^ \ u.'p.^v'v^p’p  ■  *  •  ^ju .vp  *  •  *  •  (7 )

Remark.  From  this  definition  it  follows  that


jj.vp  •  •  *  ^  fid yD  p  ...  .  .  (^)

is  an  invariant,  provided  that  ( B ),  (Q,  (Z?)  .  .  .  are
vectors.  Conversely,  the  tensor  character  of  ( A )  may  be
inferred,  if  it  is  known  that  the  expression  (8)  leads  to  an
invariant  for  an  arbitrary  choice  of  the  vectors  ( B ),  (C),
etc.

Addition  and  Subtraction.  By  addition  and  subtraction
of  the  corresponding  components  of  tensors  of  the  same
rank,  a  tensor  of  equal  rank  results  :


A


±  B


—  P-Vp


The  proof  follows  from  the  definition  of  a  tensor  given
above.

Multiplication.  From  a  tensor  of  rank  a  and  a  tensor


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS


15


of  rank  /3  we  may  obtain  a  tensor  of  rank  a  +  (3  by
multiplying  all  the  components  of  the  first  tensor  by  all
the  components  of  the  second  tensor  :

•  •  •  afi  •  •  •  •  •  •  -^a/3y  •  •  •  ( ^  O)


Contraction.  A  tensor  of  rank  a  -  2  may  be  obtained
from  one  of  rank  a  by  putting  two  definite  indices  equal
to  each  other  and  then  summing  for  this  single  index  :


T  —  a  ( -

p  •  •  •  •  •  •  v


Y A

y  ■'■Vmp


•  •  •)  •  (ii)


The  proof  is


A'  —  h  h  h  A

-*1  fxp.p  •  *  •  t//uat/p.j3c/py  •  •  •  •‘-1  afiy  ’  •


^afi^py  •  ••  A

=  ...  A


afiy

a  ay


In  addition  to  these  elementary  rules  of  operation
there  is  also  the  formation  of  tensors  by  differentiation
(“  erweiterung  ”) :

(12)


T,


■p.vp


'P


New  tensors,  in  respect  to  linear  orthogonal  transforma¬
tions,  may  be  formed  from  tensors  according  to  these  rules
of  operation.

Symmetrical  Properties  of  Tensors.  Tensors  are  called
symmetrical  or  skew-symmetrical  in  respect  to  two  of
their  indices,  ^  and  v ,  if  both  the  components  which  result
from  interchanging  the  indices  and  v  are  equal  to  each
other  or  equal  with  opposite  signs.

Condition  for  symmetry :  Apvp  =  Apvp.

Condition  for  skew-symmetry:  Ap„p  =  -  A,,pp.

Theorem.  The  character  of  symmetry  or  skew-symmetry
exists  independently  of  the  choice  of  co-ordinates,  and  in


16  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


this  lies  its  importance.  The  proof  follows  from  the
equation  defining  tensors.

Special  Tensors.

I.  The  quantities  8pcr  (4)  are  tensor  components  (funda¬
mental  tensor).

Proof.  If  in  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation  of
transformation  A\v  =  b^abvfiAa^  we  substitute  for  Aafi  the
quantities  8afi  (which  are  equal  to  I  or  o  according  as
a  =  ft  or  a  /3),  we  get

/]'  _  h  h  _  £

The  justification  for  the  last  sign  of  equality  becomes
evident  if  one  applies  (4)  to  the  inverse  substitution  (5).

II.  There  is  a  tensor  (8^vp  .  .  .)  skew-symmetrical  with
respect  to  all  pairs  of  indices,  whose  rank  is  equal  to  the
number  of  dimensions,  n,  and  whose  components  are
equal  to  +  I  or  -  1  according  as  [xvp  ...  is  an  even
or  odd  permutation  of  123  .  .  .

The  proof  follows  with  the  aid  of  the  theorem  proved
above  \  bpa\  =  1.

These  few  simple  theorems  form  the  apparatus  from
the  theory  of  invariants  for  building  the  equations  of  pre¬
relativity  physics  and  the  theory  of  special  relativity.

We  have  seen  that  in  pre-relativity  physics,  in  order  to
specify  relations  in  space,  a  body  of  reference,  or  a  space
of  reference,  is  required,  and,  in  addition,  a  Cartesian
system  of  co-ordinates.  We  can  fuse  both  these  concepts
into  a  single  one  by  thinking  of  a  Cartesian  system  of
co-ordinates  as  a  cubical  frame- work  formed  of  rods  each
of  unit  length.  The  co-ordinates  of  the  lattice  points  of


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS


17


this  frame  are  integral  numbers.  It  follows  from  the
fundamental  relation

s2  =  Arp  +  Ar22  +  Ar32

that  the  members  of  such  a  space-lattice  are  all  of  unit
length.  To  specify  relations  in  time,  we  require  in
addition  a  standard  clock  placed  at  the  origin  of  our
Cartesian  system  of  co-ordinates  or  frame  of  reference.
If  an  event  takes  place  anywhere  we  can  assign  to  it  three
co-ordinates,  xvi  and  a  time  t,  as  soon  as  we  have  specified
the  time  of  the  clock  at  the  origin  which  is  simultaneous
with  the  event.  We  therefore  give  an  objective  signifi¬
cance  to  the  statement  of  the  simultaneity  of  distant
events,  while  previously  we  have  been  concerned  only
with  the  simultaneity  of  two  experiences  of  an  individual.
The  time  so  specified  is  at  all  events  independent  of  the
position  of  the  system  of  co-ordinates  in  our  space  of
reference,  and  is  therefore  an  invariant  with  respect  to
the  transformation  (3).

It  is  postulated  that  the  system  of  equations  expressing
the  laws  of  pre-relativity  physics  is  co-variant  with  respect
to  the  transformation  (3),  as  are  the  relations  of  Euclidean
geometry.  The  isotropy  and  homogeneity  of  space  is
expressed  in  this  way.*  We  shall  now  consider  some  of

*  The  laws  of  physics  could  be  expressed,  even  in  case  there  were  a
unique  direction  in  space,  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  co-variant  with  respect  to
the  transformation  (3) ;  but  such  an  expression  would  in  this  case  be  un¬
suitable.  If  there  were  a  unique  direction  in  space  it  would  simplify  the
description  of  natural  phenomena  to  orient  the  system  of  co-ordinates  in  a
definite  way  in  this  direction.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  unique
direction  in  space  it  is  not  logical  to  formulate  the  laws  of  nature  in  such
a  way  as  to  conceal  the  equivalence  of  systems  of  co-ordinates  that  are


2


18  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


the  more  important  equations  of  physics  from  this  point
of  view.

The  equations  of  motion  of  a  material  particle  are


**.  y

m~d¥.  “


(14)


(dxv)  is  a  vector  ;  dt ,  and  therefore  also  an  invariant ;

thus  (^r)  is  a  vector  ;  in  the  same  way  it  may  be  shown

/  dsx  \

that  is  a  vector.  In  general,  the  operation  of  dif¬

ferentiation  with  respect  to  time  does  not  alter  the  tensor
character.  Since  in  is  an  invariant  (tensor  of  rank  o),

f  d2xv\

\l~df  )  lS  a  veci;or’  or  tensor  of  rank  I  (by  the  theorem

of  the  multiplication  of  tensors).  If  the  force  (Av)  has
a  vector  character,  the  same  holds  for  the  difference

(d^x  \

m~d¥  ~  Xv'  ^ese  equations  of  motion  are  therefore

valid  in  every  other  system  of  Cartesian  co-ordinates  in
the  space  of  reference.  In  the  case  where  the  forces  are
conservative  we  can  easily  recognize  the  vector  character
of  (Xv).  For  a  potential  energy,  <F,  exists,  which  depends
only  upon  the  mutual  distances  of  the  particles,  and  is
therefore  an  invariant.  The  vector  character  of  the  force,

Xv  =  -  ^7,  is  then  a  consequence  of  our  general  theorem
about  the  derivative  of  a  tensor  of  rank  o.


oriented  differently.  We  shall  meet  with  this  point  of  view  again  in  the
theories  of  special  and  general  relativity.


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS


19


Multiplying  by  the  velocity,  a  tensor  of  rank  i,  we
obtain  the  tensor  equation


dlx


m


r  -  X,


\dx,


&


=  o.


dt2  " v)  dt

By  contraction  and  multiplication  by  the  scalar  dt  we
obtain  the  equation  of  kinetic  energy

,2\


mq ‘


=  Xvdxv.


If  denotes  the  difference  of  the  co-ordinates  of
the  material  particle  and  a  point  fixed  in  space,  then
the  %v  have  the  character  of  vectors.  We  evidently


have


d2xv  d2^v


dt2  ~  ~dd'  SO  ^at  e9ua^10ns  °f  m°ti°n  of  the
particle  may  be  written

Multiplying  this  equation  by  f  we  obtain  a  tensor
equation


(>*w  -


Contracting  the  tensor  on  the  left  and  taking  the  time
average  we  obtain  the  virial  theorem,  which  we  shall
not  consider  further.  By  interchanging  the  indices  and
subsequent  subtraction,  we  obtain,  after  a  simple  trans¬
formation,  the  theorem  of  moments,


It  is  evident  in  this  way  that  the  moment  of  a  vector


20  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


is  not  a  vector  but  a  tensor.  On  account  of  their  skew-
symmetrical  character  there  are  not  nine,  but  only  three
independent  equations  of  this  system.  The  possibility  of
replacing  skew-symmetrical  tensors  of  the  second  rank  in
space  of  three  dimensions  by  vectors  depends  upon  the
formation  of  the  vector

A  —  -  A  8

[i.  CTT^CTTfl.

If  we  multiply  the  skew- symmetrical  tensor  of  rank  2
by  the  special  skew-symmetrical  tensor  8  introduced
above,  and  contract  twice,  a  vector  results  whose  compon¬
ents  are  numerically  equal  to  those  of  the  tensor.  These
are  the  so-called  axial  vectors  which  transform  differ¬
ently,  from  a  right-handed  system  to  a  left-handed  system,
from  the  There  is  a  gain  in  picturesqueness  in

regarding  a  skew-symmetrical  tensor  of  rank  2  as  a  vector
in  space  of  three  dimensions,  but  it  does  not  represent
the  exact  nature  of  the  corresponding  quantity  so  well  as
considering  it  a  tensor.

We  consider  next  the  equations  of  motion  of  a  con¬
tinuous  medium.  Let  p  be  the  density,  uv  the  velocity
components  considered  as  functions  of  the  co-ordinates  and
the  time,  Xv  the  volume  forces  per  unit  of  mass,  and  pva
the  stresses  upon  a  surface  perpendicular  to  the  c-axis
in  the  direction  of  increasing  xv.  Then  the  equations  of
motion  are,  by  Newton’s  law,

~^Pvcr  -yjr

PHi  =  "  55“  +  Px*

in  which  is  the  acceleration  of  the  particle  which  at


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS  21


time  t  has  the  co-ordinates  x*  If  we  express  this
acceleration  by  partial  differential  coefficients,  we  obtain,
after  dividing  by  p ,


"duv

1st


+


l

P


+  Xv


(i  6)


We  must  show  that  this  equation  holds  independently
of  the  special  choice  of  the  Cartesian  system  of  co-ordinates.

lsuv  'buv  .

(«„)  is  a  vector,  and  therefore  -r—  is  also  a  vector,  r —  is


a  tensor  of  rank  2,  ^~^uT  is  a  tensor  of  rank  3.  The  second

OXg-

term  on  the  left  results  from  contraction  in  the  indices
cr,  r.  The  vector  character  of  the  second  term  on  the  right
is  obvious.  In  order  that  the  first  term  on  the  right  may
also  be  a  vector  it  is  necessary  for  pv(J  to  be  a  tensor.


^Pl<T

Then  by  differentiation  and  contraction  r— ^  results,  and

0*0-

is  therefore  a  vector,  as  it  also  is  after  multiplication  by


the  reciprocal  scalar  -  •  That pv(T  is  a  tensor,  and  therefore
transforms  according  to  the  equation


P  =  ^na^vfipafl  )

is  proved  in  mechanics  by  integrating  this  equation  over
an  infinitely  small  tetrahedron.  It  is  also  proved  there
by  application  of  the  theorem  of  moments  to  an  infinitely
small  parallelopipedon,  that  pv(J  =  pav)  and  hence  that  the
tensor  of  the  stress  is  a  symmetrical  tensor.  From  what
has  been  said  it  follows  that,  with  the  aid  of  the  rules


22  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


given  above,  the  equation  is  co-variant  with  respect  to
orthogonal  transformations  in  space  (rotational  trans¬
formations)  ;  and  the  rules  according  to  which  the
quantities  in  the  equation  must  be  transformed  in  order
that  the  equation  may  be  co-variant  also  become  evident.

The  co-variance  of  the  equation  of  continuity,


tp  Xpuv)

37 +


requires,  from  the  foregoing,  no  particular  discussion.

We  shall  also  test  for  co-variance  the  equations  which
express  the  dependence  of  the  stress  components  upon
the  properties  of  the  matter,  and  set  up  these  equations
for  the  case  of  a  compressible  viscous  fluid  with  the  aid
of  the  conditions  of  co-variance.  If  we  neglect  the  vis¬
cosity,  the  pressure,  />,  will  be  a  scalar,  and  will  depend
only  upon  the  density  and  the  temperature  of  the  fluid.
The  contribution  to  the  stress  tensor  is  then  evidently

pK*


in  which  is  the  special  symmetrical  tensor.  This  term
will  also  be  present  in  the  case  of  a  viscous  fluid.  But  in
this  case  there  will  also  be  pressure  terms,  which  depend
upon  the  space  derivatives  of  the  uv .  We  shall  assume
that  this  dependence  is  a  linear  one.  Since  these  terms
must  be  symmetrical  tensors,  the  only  ones  which  enter
will  be


(for  r  *  is  a  scalar).  For  physical  reasons  (no  slipping)

a


PRE  RELATIVITY  PHYSICS  23


it  is  assumed  that  for  symmetrical  dilatations  in  all
directions,  i.e.  when


bu2  bu3  bUj
'bx1  ~  bx2  ~  bx2  ’  bx2


,  etc.,  =  o,


bx2  bx3  ’  bx2
there  are  no  frictional  forces  present,  from  which  it

2  1  bu,

follows  that  /3  =  -  -a.  If  only  ^7  is  different  from


bu1


zero,  let  p3l  =  -  77- — ,  by  which  a  is  determined.  We


then  obtain  for  the  complete  stress  tensor,

rY^u  .  ^y\  2{bU,  bu2  bu3\  *  “1  ,

(*s)

The  heuristic  value  of  the  theory  of  invariants,  which
arises  from  the  isotropy  of  space  (equivalence  of  all
directions),  becomes  evident  from  this  example.

We  consider,  finally,  Maxwell’s  equations  in  the  form
which  are  the  foundation  of  the  electron  theory  of  Lorentz.


u3

I

bex

+

I

dx2

^x3

C

bt

c

I

be 2

+

1

^3

Da*!

c

bi

c

•

be.

•

be.

•

Tie.

1  +

+

0  _

p

bx1

bx.2

bx

3

r

^3  _

'be2

I  bhx

^2

bx2

c

Tit

be1

^■3

I  bh2

^3

bxl

c

bt

(19)


•  (20)


24  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY

i  is  a  vector,  because  the  current  density  is  defined  as
the  density  of  electricity  multiplied  by  the  vector  velocity
of  the  electricity.  According  to  the  first  three  equations
it  is  evident  that  e  is  also  to  be  regarded  as  a  vector.
Then  h  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  vector.*  The  equations
may,  however,  easily  be  interpreted  if  h  is  regarded  as  a
symmetrical  tensor  of  the  second  rank.  In  this  sense,  we
write  /z23,  k31)  ^12j  in  place  of  hx,  k2i  hz  respectively.  Pay¬
ing  attention  to  the  skew-symmetry  of  k^,  the  first  three
equations  of  (19)  and  (20)  may  be  written  in  the  form


_  1  +  L  {

bxv  C  bt  C  11

'K.  -  ^  =  +  I

bxv  bx^  C  bt


(19a)

(20a)


In  contrast  to  e,  h  appears  as  a  quantity  which  has  the
same  type  of  symmetry  as  an  angular  velocity.  The
divergence  equations  then  take  the  form


=  P  .  .  .  (i9b)

+  'bhyp  bh?iX  _  o

bxp  bx^  bxv

The  last  equation  is  a  skew-symmetrical  tensor  equation
of  the  third  rank  (the  skew-symmetry  of  the  left-hand
side  with  respect  to  every  pair  of  indices  may  easily  be


*  These  considerations  will  make  the  reader  familiar  with  tensor  opera¬
tions  without  the  special  difficulties  of  the  four-dimensional  treatment;
corresponding  considerations  in  the  theory  of  special  relativity  (Minkowski’s*
interpretation  of  the  field)  will  then  offer  fewer  difficulties,


PRE-RELATIVITY  PHYSICS  25

*

1

proved,  if  attention  is  paid  to  the  skew-symmetry  cf  k^).
This  notation  is  more  natural  than  the  usual  one,  because,
in  contrast  to  the  latter,  it  is  applicable  to  Cartesian  left-
handed  systems  as  well  as  to  right-handed  systems  without
change  of  sign.


LECTURE  II


THE  THEORY  OF  SPECIAL  RELATIVITY

THE  previous  considerations  concerning  the  configura¬
tion  of  rigid  bodies  have  been  founded,  irrespective
of  the  assumption  as  to  the  validity  of  the  Euclidean
geometry,  upon  the  hypothesis  that  all  directions  in  space,
or  all  configurations  of  Cartesian  systems  of  co-ordinates,
are  physically  equivalent.  We  may  express  this  as  the
“  principle  of  relativity  with  respect  to  direction,”  and  it
has  been  shown  how  equations  (laws  of  nature)  may  be
found,  in  accord  with  this  principle,  by  the  aid  of  the
calculus  of  tensors.  We  now  inquire  whether  there  is  a
relativity  with  respect  to  the  state  of  motion  of  the  space
of  reference ;  in  other  words,  whether  there  are  spaces  of
reference  in  motion  relatively  to  each  other  which  are
physically  equivalent.  From  the  standpoint  of  mechanics
it  appears  that  equivalent  spaces  of  reference  do  exist.
For  experiments  upon  the  earth  tell  us  nothing  of  the
fact  that  we  are  moving  about  the  sun  with  a  velocity  of
approximately  30  kilometres  a  second.  On  the  other
hand,  this  physical  equivalence  does  not  seem  to  hold  for
spaces  of  reference  in  arbitrary  motion ;  for  mechanical
effects  do  not  seem  to  be  subject  to  the  same  laws  in  a
jolting  railway  train  as  in  one  moving  with  uniform

26


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


27


velocity ;  the  rotation  of  the  earth  must  be  considered  in
writing  down  the  equations  of  motion  relatively  to  the
earth.  It  appears,  therefore,  as  if  there  were  Cartesian
systems  of  co-ordinates,  the  so-called  inertial  systems,  with
reference  to  which  the  laws  of  mechanics  (more  generally
the  laws  of  physics)  are  expressed  in  the  simplest  form.
We  may  infer  the  validity  of  the  following  theorem  :  If
K  is  an  inertial  system,  then  every  other  system  K'  which
moves  uniformly  and  without  rotation  relatively  to  K ,  is
also  an  inertial  system ;  the  laws  of  nature  are  in  con¬
cordance  for  all  inertial  systems.  This  statement  we  shall
call  the  “  principle  of  special  relativity.”  We  shall  draw
certain  conclusions  from  this  principle  of  “  relativity  of
translation  ”  just  as  we  have  already  done  for  relativity  of
direction.

In  order  to  be  able  to  do  this,  we  must  first  solve  the
following  problem.  If  we  are  given  the  Cartesian  co¬
ordinates,^,  and  the  time  /,  of  an  event  relatively  to  one
inertial  system,  K ,  how  can  we  calculate  the  co-ordinates,
x v ,  and  the  time,  of  the  same  event  relatively  to  an
inertial  system  K'  which  moves  with  uniform  trans¬
lation  relatively  to  K  ?  In  the  pre-relativity  physics
this  problem  was  solved  by  making  unconsciously  two
hypotheses  : —

i.  The  time  is  absolute;  the  time  of  an  event,  t\
relatively  to  K'  is  the  same  as  the  time  relatively  to  K.
If  instantaneous  signals  could  be  sent  to  a  distance,  and
if  one  knew  that  the  state  of  motion  of  a  clock  had  no
influence  on  its  rate,  then  this  assumption  would  be
physically  established.  For  then  clocks,  similar  to  one


28  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


another,  and  regulated  alike,  could  be  distributed  over
the  systems  K  and  K\  at  rest  relatively  to  them,  and
their  indications  would  be  independent  of  the  state  of
motion  of  the  systems  ;  the  time  of  an  event  would  then
be  given  by  the  clock  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood.

2.  Length  is  absolute  ;  if  an  interval,  at  rest  relatively
to  K,  has  a  length  s,  then  it  has  the  same  length  s,
relatively  to  a  system  K'  which  is  in  motion  relatively
to  K.

If  the  axes  of  K  and  K'  are  parallel  to  each  other,  a
simple  calculation  based  on  these  two  assumptions,  gives
the  equations  of  transformation

xv  =  xv  -  av  -  bvt
t'  =  t  -  b

This  transformation  is  known  as  the  “  Galilean  Trans¬
formation.”  Differentiating  twice  by  the  time,  we  get

d2x  v  d2xv

~dF  =  ~dFm


Further,  it  follows  that  for  two  simultaneous  events,


J  a)  _


x


(2)  =  ^  (1)  _


(2)


The  invariance  of  the  distance  between  the  two  points
results  from  squaring  and  adding.  From  this  easily
follows  the  co-variance  of  Newton’s  equations  of  motion
with  respect  to  the  Galilean  transformation  (21).  Hence
it  follows  that  classical  mechanics  is  in  accord  with  the
principle  of  special  relativity  if  the  two  hypotheses
respecting  scales  and  clocks  are  made.

But  this  attempt  to  found  relativity  of  translation  upon
the  Galilean  transformation  fails  when  applied  to  electron


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


29


magnetic  phenomena.  The  Maxwell-Lorentz  electro¬
magnetic  equations  are  not  co-variant  with  respect  to  the
Galilean  transformation.  In  particular,  we  note,  by  (21),
that  a  ray  of  light  which  referred  to  K  has  a  velocity  c,
has  a  different  velocity  referred  to  K\  depending  upon
its  direction.  The  space  of  reference  of  K  is  therefore
distinguished,  with  respect  to  its  physical  properties,  from
all  spaces  of  reference  which  are  in  motion  relatively  to  it
(quiescent  sether).  But  all  experiments  have  shown  that
electro-magnetic  and  optical  phenomena,  relatively  to  the
earth  as  the  body  of  reference,  are  not  influenced  by  the
translational  velocity  of  the  earth.  The  most  important
of  these  experiments  are  those  of  Michelson  and  Morley,
which  I  shall  assume  are  known.  The  validity  of  the
principle  of  special  relativity  can  therefore  hardly  be
doubted.

O11  the  other  hand,  the  Maxwell-Lorentz  equations
have  proved  their  validity  in  the  treatment  of  optical
problems  in  moving  bodies.  No  other  theory  has
satisfactorily  explained  the  facts  of  aberration,  the
propagation  of  light  in  moving  bodies  (Flzeau),  and
phenomena  observed  in  double  stars  (De  Sitter).  The
consequence  of  the  Maxwell-Lorentz  equations  that  in  a
vacuum  light  is  propagated  with  the  velocity  c,  at  least
with  respect  to  a  definite  inertial  system  K,  must  there¬
fore  be  regarded  as  proved.  According  to  the  principle
of  special  relativity,  we  must  also  assume  the  truth  of
this  principle  for  every  other  inertial  system.

Before  we  draw  any  conclusions  from  these  two
principles  we  must  first  review  the  physical  significance


30  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY

of  the  concepts  “time”  and  “velocity.”  It  follows  from
what  has  gone  before,  that  co-ordinates  with  respect  to
an  inertial  system  are  physically  defined  by  means  of
measurements  and  constructions  with  the  aid  of  rigid
bodies.  In  order  to  measure  time,  we  have  supposed  a
clock,  Uy  present  somewhere,  at  rest  relatively  to  K.  But
we  cannot  fix  the  time,  by  means  of  this  clock,  of  an  event
whose  distance  from  the  clock  is  not  negligible  ;  for  there
are  no  “  instantaneous  signals  ”  that  we  can  use  in  order
to  compare  the  time  of  the  event  with  that  of  the  clock.
In  order  to  complete  the  definition  of  time  we  may
employ  the  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of
light  in  a  vacuum.  Let  us  suppose  that  we  place  similar
clocks  at  points  of  the  system  K ,  at  rest  relatively  to  it,
and  regulated  according  to  the  following  scheme.  A  ray
of  light  is  sent  out  from  one  of  the  clocks,  Um,  at  the
instant  when  it  indicates  the  time  tm)  and  travels  through
a  vacuum  a  distance  rmn}  to  the  clock  Un  ;  at  the  instant
when  this  ray  meets  the  clock  Un  the  latter  is  set  to

indicate  the  time  tn  =  tm  4-  —  .*  The  principle  of  the

c

constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  then  states  that  this
adjustment  of  the  clocks  wall  not  lead  to  contradictions.
With  clocks  so  adjusted,  we  can  assign  the  time  to  events
which  take  place  near  any  one  of  them.  It  is  essential  to

*  Strictly  speaking,  it  would  be  more  correct  to  define  simultaneity  first,
somewhat  as  follows :  two  events  taking  place  at  the  points  A  and  B  of
the  system  K  are  simultaneous  if  they  appear  at  the  same  instant  when
observed  from  the  middle  point,  M,  of  the  interval  AB.  Time  is  then
defined  as  the  ensemble  of  the  indications  of  similar  clocks,  at  rest
relatively  to  K,  which  register  the  same  simultaneously.


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY  31

note  that  this  definition  of  time  relates  only  to  the  inertial
system  K ,  since  we  have  used  a  system  of  clocks  at  rest
relatively  to  K.  The  assumption  which  was  made  in  the
pre-relativity  physics  of  the  absolute  character  of  time
^i.e.  the  independence  of  time  of  the  choice  of  the  inertial
system)  does  not  follow  at  all  from  this  definition.

The  theory  of  relativity  is  often  criticized  for  giving,
without  justification,  a  central  theoretical  role  to  the
propagation  of  light,  in  that  it  founds  the  concept  of  time
upon  the  law  of  propagation  of  light.  The  situation,
however,  is  somewhat  as  follows.  In  order  to  give
physical  significance  to  the  concept  of  time,  processes  of
some  kind  are  required  which  enable  relations  to  be
established  between  different  places.  It  is  immaterial
what  kind  of  processes  one  chooses  for  such  a  definition
of  time.  It  is  advantageous,  however,  for  the  theory,
to  choose  only  those  processes  concerning  which  we  know
something  certain.  This  holds  for  the  propagation  of
light  in  vacuo  in  a  higher  degree  than  for  any  other  process
which  could  be  considered,  thanks  to  the  investigations
of  Maxwell  and  H.  A.  Lorentz.

From  all  of  these  considerations,  space  and  time  data
have  a  physically  real,  and  not  a  mere  fictitious,  signifi¬
cance  ;  in  particular  this  holds  for  all  the  relations  in
which  co-ordinates  and  time  enter,  e.g.  the  relations
(21).  There  is,  therefore,  sense  in  asking  whether  those
equations  are  true  or  not,  as  well  as  in  asking  what  the
true  equations  of  transformation  are  by  which  we  pass
from  one  inertial  system  K  to  another,  K\  moving
relatively  to  it.  It  may  be  shown  that  this  is  uniquely


32  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


settled  by  means  of  the  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the
velocity  of  light  and  the  principle  of  special  relativity.

To  this  end  we  think  of  space  and  time  physically
defined  with  respect  to  two  inertial  systems,  K  and  K\  in
the  way  that  has  been  shown.  Further,  let  a  ray  of  light
pass  from  one  point  P1  to  another  point  P2  of  K  through
a  vacuum.  If  r  is  the  measured  distance  between  the  two
points,  then  the  propagation  of  light  must  satisfy  the
equation

r  =  c .  At

If  we  square  this  equation,  and  express  r 2  by  the
differences  of  the  co-ordinates,  Axv,  in  place  of  this  equation
we  can  write

(A;rv)2  -  c2A  t2  =  o  .  .  (22)

This  equation  formulates  the  principle  of  the  constancy
of  the  velocity  of  light  relatively  to  K.  It  must  hold
whatever  may  be  the  motion  of  the  source  which  emits
the  ray  of  light.

The  same  propagation  of  light  may  also  be  considered
relatively  to  K\  in  which  case  also  the  principle  of  the
constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  must  be  satisfied.
Therefore,  with  respect  to  K',  we  have  the  equation

^>(ATV)2  -  c2 A/2  =  o  .  (22a)

Equations  (22a)  and  (22)  must  be  mutually  consistent
with  each  other  with  respect  to  the  transformation  which
transforms  from  K  to  K\  A  transformation  which  effects
this  we  shall  call  a  “Lorentz  transformation.”

Before  considering  these  transformations  in  detail  we


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


33


shall  make  a  few  general  remarks  about  space  and  time.
In  the  pre-relativity  physics  space  and  time  were  separ¬
ate  entities.  Specifications  of  time  were  independent  of
the  choice  of  the  space  of  reference.  The  Newtonian
mechanics  was  relative  with  respect  to  the  space  of
reference,  so  that,  e.g.  the  statement  that  two  non-simul-
taneous  events  happened  at  the  same  place  had  no  objective
meaning  (that  is,  independent  of  the  space  of  reference).
But  this  relativity  had  no  role  in  building  up  the  theory.
One  spoke  of  points  of  space,  as  of  instants  of  time,  as  if
they  were  absolute  realities.  It  was  not  observed  that
the  true  element  of  the  space-time  specification  was  the
event,  specified  by  the  four  numbers  xl}  x2,  xz ,  t.  The
conception  of  something  happening  was  always  that  of  a
four-dimensional  continuum  ;  but  the  recognition  of  this
was  obscured  by  the  absolute  character  of  the  pre-relativity
time.  Upon  giving  up  the  hypothesis  of  the  absolute
character  of  time,  particularly  that  of  simultaneity,  the
four-dimensionality  of  the  time-space  concept  was  im¬
mediately  recognized.  It  is  neither  the  point  in  space,
nor  the  instant  in  time,  at  which  something  happens  that
has  physical  reality,  but  only  the  event  itself.  There  is
no  absolute  (independent  of  the  space  of  reference)  relation
in  space,  and  no  absolute  relation  in  time  between  two
events,  but  there  is  an  absolute  (independent  of  the  space
of  reference)  relation  in  space  and  time,  as  will  appear  in
the  sequel.  The  circumstance  that  there  is  no  objective
rational  division  of  the  four-dimensional  continuum  into
a  three-dimensional  space  and  a  one-dimensional  time
continuum  indicates  that  the  laws  of  nature  will  assume
3


34  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


a  form  which  is  logically  most  satisfactory  when  expressed
as  laws  in  the  four-dimensional  space-time  continuum.
Upon  this  depends  the  great  advance  in  method  which
the  theory  of  relativity  owes  to  Minkowski.  Considered
from  this  standpoint,  we  must  regard  xv  x2,  x3)  t  as  the
four  co-ordinates  of  an  event  in  the  four-dimensional  con¬
tinuum.  We  have  far  less  success  in  picturing  to  ourselves
relations  in  this  four-dimensional  continuum  than  in  the
three-dimensional  Euclidean  continuum  ;  but  it  must  be
emphasized  that  even  in  the  Euclidean  three-dimensional
geometry  its  concepts  and  relations  are  only  of  an  abstract
nature  in  our  minds,  and  are  not  at  all  identical  with  the
images  we  form  visually  and  through  our  sense  of  touch.
The  non-divisibility  of  the  four-dimensional  continuum
of  events  does  not  at  all,  however,  involve  the  equivalence
of  the  space  co-ordinates  with  the  time  co-ordinate.  On
the  contrary,  we  must  remember  that  the  time  co-ordinate
is  defined  physically  wholly  differently  from  the  space
co-ordinates.  The  relations  (22)  and  (22a)  which  when
equated  define  the  Lorentz  transformation  show,  further,
a  difference  in  the  role  of  the  time  co-ordinate  from  that
of  the  space  co-ordinates  ;  for  the  term  At2  has  the  opposite
sign  to  the  space  terms,  Ax2,  Ax22,  Ax32.

Before  we  analyse  further  the  conditions  which  define
the  Lorentz  transformation,  we  shall  introduce  the  light¬
time,  l  =  ct ,  in  place  of  the  time,  t,  in  order  that  the
constant  c  shall  not  enter  explicitly  into  the  formulas  to
be  developed  later.  Then  the  Lorentz  transformation  is
defined  in  such  a  way  that,  first,  it  makes  the  equation

Ax 2  +  Ax2  +  Ax3  -  A l2  =  o  .  (22b)


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


35


a  co-variant  equation,  that  is,  an  equation  which  is  satisfied
with  respect  to  every  inertial  system  if  it  is  satisfied  in
the  inertial  system  to  which  we  refer  the  two  given  events
(emission  and  reception  of  the  ray  of  light).  Finally,
with  Minkowski,  we  introduce  in  place  of  the  real  time
co-ordinate  /  =  ct,  the  imaginary  time  co-ordinate

=  il  =  ict  -  I  =  z).

Then  the  equation  defining  the  propagation  of  light,
which  must  be  co-variant  with  respect  to  the  Lorentz
transformation,  becomes

}Ax2  =  A;tq2  +  A^22  +  A;r32  +  A^42  =  o  (22c)
(4)

This  condition  is  always  satisfied  *  if  we  satisfy  the  more
general  condition  that

s2  =  A^!2  +  A^22  +  A^32  +  A^42  .  (23)

shall  be  an  invariant  with  respect  to  the  transformation.
This  condition  is  satisfied  only  by  linear  transformations,
that  is,  transformations  of  the  type

■  ■  ■  (24)

in  which  the  summation  over  the  a  is  to  be  extended
from  a  =  I  to  a  =  4.  A  glance  at  equations  (23)  and
(24)  shows  that  the  Lorentz  transformation  so  defined  is
identical  with  the  translational  and  rotational  transforma¬
tions  of  the  Euclidean  geometry,  if  we  disregard  the
number  of  dimensions  and  the  relations  of  reality.  We

*  That  this  specialization  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  case  will  be  evident
later.


36  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


can  also  conclude  that  the  coefficients  b Ma  must  satisfy  the
conditions


^ \iafy va  iv  ^  av


.  (25)

Since  the  ratios  of  the  xv  are  real,  it  follows  that  all  the
a, a  and  the  b Ma  are  real,  except  biV  b±2,  b±3,  bw  bu,  and
£34,  which  are  purely  imaginary.

Special  Lorentz  Transformation.  We  obtain  the
simplest  transformations  of  the  type  of  (24)  and  (25)  if
only  two  of  the  co-ordinates  are  to  be  transformed,  and  if
all  the  which  determine  the  new  origin,  vanish.  We
obtain  then  for  the  indices  1  and  2,  on  account  of  the
three  independent  conditions  which  the  relations  (25)
furnish,

x\  —  xY  cos  cf)  -  x 2  sin  <£
x\  =  xx  sin  <f>  +  x2  cos  <jf>


x3  =  x3

x\  =


(26)


This  is  a  simple  rotation  in  space  of  the  (space)
co-ordinate  system  about  ^3-axis.  We  see  that  the
rotational  transformation  in  space  (without  the  time
transformation)  which  we  studied  before  is  contained  in
the  Lorentz  transformation  as  a  special  case.  For  the
indices  1  and  4  we  obtain,  in  an  analogous  manner,


x\  =  x1  cos  \fr  -  x±  sin  yfr
x\  —  xx  sin  y/r  +  x4  cos  yjr

X  o  =a  X  n


X  3  =  *3


I


(26a)


On  account  of  the  relations  of  reality  yjr  must  be  taken
as  imaginary.  To  interpret  these  equations  physically,
we  introduce  the  real  light-time  l  and  the  velocity  v  of


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


37


K'  relatively  to  K ,  instead  of  the  imaginary  angle  yjr.  We
have,  first,

x\  =  x\  cos  ^  _  sin  yjr
l  —  -  MTj  sin  yjr  +  /  cos


Since  for  the  origin  of  K\  i.e.,  for  xx  =  o,  we  must  have
Aq  ==  it  follows  from  the  first  of  these  equations  that


and  also


so  that  we  obtain


v  =  i  tan  -v/r


sin  y\r  =


-  iv


s/l  -  V 1


COS  yjr  =  7=


F2/


-T ,  =


/'  =


xx  -  vl  ^

Jl  -  z/2

/  -  ZUq

v/T  “  v  ‘2


X2

Xo


=  ^


(27)

(28)


(29)


These  equations  form  the  well-known  special  Lorentz
transformation,  which  in  the  general  theory  represents  a
rotation,  through  an  imaginary  angle,  of  the  four-dimen¬
sional  system  of  co-ordinates.  If  we  introduce  the  ordinary
time  t,  in  place  of  the  light-time  /,  then  in  (29)  we  must

v

replace  l  by  ct  and  v  by  -•

We  must  now  fill  in  a  gap.  From  the  principle  of  the
constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  it  follows  that  the
equation

A.V2  =  o


38  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY

has  a  significance  which  is  independent  of  the  choice  of
the  inertial  system  ;  but  the  invariance  of  the  quantity

does  not  at  all  follow  from  this.  This  quantity

might  be  transformed  with  a  factor.  This  depends  upon
the  fact  that  the  right-hand  side  of  (29)  might  be  multi¬
plied  by  a  factor  independent  of  v.  But  the  principle
of  relativity  does  not  permit  this  factor  to  be  different  from
1,  as  we  shall  now  show.  Let  us  assume  that  we  have
a  rigid  circular  cylinder  moving  in  the  direction  of  its
axis.  If  its  radius,  measured  at  rest  with  a  unit  measur¬
ing  rod  is  equal  to  R0i  its  radius  R  in  motion,  might  be
different  from  R0,  since  the  theory  of  relativity  does  not
make  the  assumption  that  the  shape  of  bodies  with  respect
to  a  space  of  reference  is  independent  of  their  motion
relatively  to  this  space  of  reference.  But  all  directions
in  space  must  be  equivalent  to  each  other.  R  may  there¬
fore  depend  upon  the  magnitude  q  of  the  velocity,  but
not  upon  its  direction ;  R  must  therefore  be  an  even
function  of  q.  If  the  cylinder  is  at  rest  relatively  to  K'
the  equation  of  its  lateral  surface  is

;r'2  +  /2  =  R02.

If  we  write  the  last  two  equations  of  (29)  more  generally


then  the  lateral  surface  of  the  cylinder  referred  to  K
satisfies  the  equation

R  2
-^0


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


39


The  factor  X  therefore  measures  the  lateral  contraction  of
the  cylinder,  and  can  thus,  from  the  above,  be  only  an
even  function  of  v.

If  we  introduce  a  third  system  of  co-ordinates,  K" ,
which  moves  relatively  to  K'  with  velocity  v  in  the  direc¬
tion  of  the  negative  ^r-axis  of  K,  we  obtain,  by  apply¬
ing  (29)  twice,

x\  —  X(z;)X(  -  v)x±


•  •  •  •

/"  =  X(v)X(  -  v)l.

Now,  since  \(v)  must  be  equal  to  X(  -  v ),  and  since  we
assume  that  we  use  the  same  measuring  rods  in  all  the
systems,  it  follows  that  the  transformation  of  K"  to  K
must  be  the  identical  transformation  (since  the  possibility
X  =  —  I  does  not  need  to  be  considered).  It  is  essential
for  these  considerations  to  assume  that  the  behaviour  of
the  measuring  rods  does  not  depend  upon  the  history  of
their  previous  motion.

Moving  Measuring  Rods  and  Clocks.  At  the  definite  K-
time,  l=o,  the  position  of  the  points  given  by  the  integers
x\  =  n,  is  with  respect  to  K,  given  by  xx  =  n yj  1  -  v2, ;
this  follows  from  the  first  of  equations  (29)  and  expresses
the  Lorentz  contraction.  A  clock  at  rest  at  the  origin
xY  =  o  of  K ,  whose  beats  are  characterized  by  /  =  n,  will,
when  observed  from  K',  have  beats  characterized  by

n

1  =  Vr=7^;

this  follows  from  the  second  of  equations  (29)  and  shows


40  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


that  the  clock  goes  slower  than  if  it  were  at  rest  relatively
to  K' .  These  two  consequences,  which  hold,  mutatis
mutandis ,  for  every  system  of  reference,  form  the  physical
content,  free  from  convention,  of  the  Lorentz  transforma¬
tion.

Addition  Theorem  for  Velocities.  If  we  combine  two
special  Lorentz  transformations  with  the  relative  velocities
v1  and  v2,  then  the  velocity  of  the  single  Lorentz  trans¬
formation  which  takes  the  place  of  the  two  separate  ones
is,  according  to  (27),  given  by


vu  = 1


,  ,  ,  N  .  tan  'v k  +  tan  aK

tan  (*  x  +  _  t;n  ^  tan\  =


V,  +  V,


2  1  +  ^2  ’


(30)


General  Statements  about  the  Lorentz  Transformation
and  its  Theory  of  Invariants.  The  whole  theory  of
invariants  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity  depends  upon
the  invariant  a2  (23).  Formally,  it  has  the  same  role  in
the  four-dimensional  space-time  continuum  as  the  in¬
variant  A-vp  +  Arq2  +  A^32  in  the  Euclidean  geometry
and  in  the  pre-relativity  physics.  The  latter  quantity  is
not  an  invariant  with  respect  to  all  the  Lorentz  transfor¬
mations ;  the  quantity  a2  of  equation  (23)  assumes  the
role  of  this  invariant.  With  respect  to  an  arbitrary
inertial  system,  a2  may  be  determined  by  measurements  ;
with  a  given  unit  of  measure  it  is  a  completely  determinate
quantity,  associated  with  an  arbitrary  pair  of  events.

The  invariant  a2  differs,  disregarding  the  number  of
dimensions,  from  the  corresponding  invariant  of  the
Euclidean  geometry  in  the  following  points.  In  the
Euclidean  geometry  a2  is  necessarily  positive  ;  it  vanishes


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


41


only  when  the  two  points  concerned  come  together.  On
the  other  hand,  from  the  vanishing  of


s2  =  ^Aav  =  A-t'f  +  Aal2  +  Aa'32  -  A  t2

l


it  cannot  be  concluded  that  the  two  space-time  points
fall  together;  the  vanishing  of  this  quantity  s2,  is  the
invariant  condition  that  the  two  space-time  points  can  be
connected  by  a  light  signal  in  vacuo.  If  P  is  a  point


42  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


(event)  represented  in  the  four-dimensional  space  of  the
xv  x2i  x3)  /,  then  all  the  “  points  ”  which  can  be  connected
to  P  by  means  of  a  light  signal  lie  upon  the  cone  s2  —  o
(compare  Fig.  I,  in  which  the  dimension  x3  is  suppressed).
The  “  upper  ”  half  of  the  cone  may  contain  the  “  points  ”
to  which  light  signals  can  be  sent  from  P;  then  the
“  lower  ”  half  of  the  cone  will  contain  the  “  points  ”  from
which  light  signals  can  be  sent  to  P.  The  points  P'
enclosed  by  the  conical  surface  furnish,  with  P,  a  negative
s2 ;  PP',  as  well  as  P'P  is  then,  according  to  Minkowski,
of  the  nature  of  a  time.  Such  intervals  represent  elements
of  possible  paths  of  motion,  the  velocity  being  less  than
that  of  light.*  In  this  case  the  /-axis  may  be  drawn  in
the  direction  of  PP '  by  suitably  choosing  the  state  of
motion  of  the  inertial  system.  If  P'  lies  outside  of  the
“light-cone”  then  PP'  is  of  the  nature  of  a  space;  in
this  case,  by  properly  choosing  the  inertial  system,  A/
can  be  made  to  vanish.

By  the  introduction  of  the  imaginary  time  variable,
x±  =  z7,  Minkowski  has  made  the  theory  of  invariants  for
the  four-dimensional  continuum  of  physical  phenomena
fully  analogous  to  the  theory  of  invariants  for  the  three-
dimensional  continuum  of  Euclidean  space.  The  theory
of  four-dimensional  tensors  of  special  relativity  differs  from
the  theory  of  tensors  in  three-dimensional  space,  therefore,
only  in  the  number  of  dimensions  and  the  relations  of
reality.

*  That  material  velocities  exceeding  that  of  light  are  not  possible,
follows  from  the  appearance  of  the  radical  i  -  v 2  in  the  special  Lorentz
transformation  (29).


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


43


A  physical  entity  which  is  specified  by  four  quantities,
Av ,  in  an  arbitrary  inertial  system  of  the  xly  x2,  x3,  x±,  is
called  a  4-vector,  with  the  components  Av,  if  the  Av
correspond  in  their  relations  of  reality  and  the  properties
of  transformation  to  the  Axv ;  it  may  be  of  the  nature  of
a  space  or  of  a  time.  The  sixteen  quantities,  A^v  then
form  the  components  of  a  tensor  of  the  second  rank,  if
they  transform  according  to  the  scheme

A  fiV  *

It  follows  from  this  that  the  A^v  behave,  with  respect  to
their  properties  of  transformation  and  their  properties
of  reality,  as  the  products  of  components,  U^Vv,  of  two
4-vectors,  (£7)  and  ( V).  All  the  components  are  real
except  those  which  contain  the  index  4  once,  those  being
purely  imaginary.  Tensors  of  the  third  and  higher  ranks
may  be  defined  in  an  analogous  way.  The  operations
of  addition,  subtraction,  multiplication,  contraction  and
differentiation  for  these  tensors  are  wholly  analogous  to
the  corresponding  operations  for  tensors  in  three-dimen¬
sional  space.

Before  we  apply  the  tensor  theory  to  the  four-dimen¬
sional  space-time  continuum,  we  shall  examine  more
particularly  the  skew-symmetrical  tensors.  The  tensor
of  the  second  rank  has,  in  general,  16  =  4.4  components.
In  the  case  of  skew-symmetry  the  components  with  two
equal  indices  vanish,  and  the  components  with  unequal
indices  are  equal  and  opposite  in  pairs.  There  exist,
therefore,  only  six  independent  components,  as  is  the
case  in  the  electromagnetic  field.  In  fact,  it  will  be  shown


44  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


when  we  consider  Maxwell’s  equations  that  these  may
be  looked  upon  as  tensor  equations,  provided  we  regard
the  electromagnetic  field  as  a  skew-symmetrical  tensor.
Further,  it  is  clear  that  the  skew-symmetrical  tensor  of
the  third  rank  (skew-symmetrical  in  all  pairs  of  indices)
has  only  four  independent  components,  since  there  are
only  four  combinations  of  three  different  indices.

We  now  turn  to  Maxwell’s  equations  (19a),  (19b),  (20a)>
(20b),  and  introduce  the  notation  :  *


023

^23

031

h3i

012

hi2

014

-  ie*

024  03il

-  tey  -  iezj

■  (30a)

Ji

1

/.

I

/a

I

i  .

•  (30

'cl*

-  i y

c

-  \z

c  z

ip\

1

with  the  convention

that

</>M„  shall

be

equal  to

*pvix'

Then  Maxwell’s  equations  may  be  combined  into  the
forms


A

3  ^  iii'  3<Lcr  3  rf-1  u  )L

tx*


(32)

(33)


as  one  can  easily  verify  by  substituting  from  (30a)  and
(31).  Equations  (32)  and  (33)  have  a  tensor  character,
and  are  therefore  co-variant  with  respect  to  Lorentz
transformations,  if  the  <£MJ,  and  the  J ,x  have  a  tensor
character,  which  we  assume.  Consequently,  the  laws  for


*  In  order  to  avoid  confusion  from  now  on  we  shall  use  the  three-
dimensional  space  indices,  x,  y,  z  instead  of  1,  2,  3,  and  we  shall  reserve
the  numeral  indices  1,  2,  3,  4  for  the  four-dimensional  space-time  con¬
tinuum.


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


45


transforming  these  quantities  from  one  to  another  allow¬
able  (inertial)  system  of  co-ordinates  are  uniquely
determined.  The  progress  in  method  which  electro¬
dynamics  owes  to  the  theory  of  special  relativity  lies
principally  in  this,  that  the  number  of  independent
hypotheses  is  diminished.  If  we  consider,  for  example,
equations  (19a)  only  from  the  standpoint  of  relativity  of
direction,  as  we  have  done  above,  we  see  that  they  have
three  logically  independent  terms.  The  way  in  which
the  electric  intensity  enters  these  equations  appears  to
be  wholly  independent  of  the  way  in  which  the  magnetic
intensity  enters  them  ;  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  instead

c)2e

of  -^jr,  we  had,  say,  or  if  this  term  were  absent.  On


the  other  hand,  only  two  independent  terms  appear  in
equation  (32).  The  electromagnetic  field  appears  as  a
formal  unit ;  the  way  in  which  the  electric  field  enters
this  equation  is  determined  by  the  way  in  which  the
magnetic  field  enters  it.  Besides  the  electromagnetic
field,  only  the  electric  current  density  appears  as  an
independent  entity.  This  advance  in  method  arises  from
the  fact  that  the  electric  and  magnetic  fields  draw  their
separate  existences  from  the  relativity  of  motion.  A
field  which  appears  to  be  purely  an  electric  field,  judged
from  one  system,  has  also  magnetic  field  components
when  judged  from  another  inertial  system.  When  applied
to  an  electromagnetic  field,  the  general  law  of  transforma¬
tion  furnishes,  for  the  special  case  of  the  special  Lorentz
transformation,  the  equations


46  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


X

h'*  =  h*  -j

Cy  —  V\\z

,  ,  K  +

y  \J  I  -  V2

>  x/i  -^4

e*  +  vhy

,  ,  -  vey

*/  I  -  V2

*  v/l  -vJ

If  there  exists  with  respect  to  K  only  a  magnetic  field,
h,  but  no  electric  field,  e,  then  with  respect  to  K'  there
exists  an  electric  field  e'  as  well,  which  would  act  upon
an  electric  particle  at  rest  relatively  to  K' .  An  observer
at  rest  relatively  to  K  would  designate  this  force  as  the
Biot-Savart  force,  or  the  Lorentz  electromotive  force.  It
therefore  appears  as  if  this  electromotive  force  had  become
fused  with  the  electric  field  intensity  into  a  single  entity.

In  order  to  view  this  relation  formally,  let  us  consider
the  expression  for  the  force  acting  upon  unit  volume  of
electricity,

k  =  pe  +  [i,  h]  .  .  .  (35)

in  which  i  is  the  vector  velocity  of  electricity,  with  the
velocity  of  light  as  the  unit.  If  we  introduce  and
according  to  (30a)  and  (31),  we  obtain  for  the  first
component  the  expression

$12  J 2  +  ^13^3  +

Observing  that  <f)n  vanishes  on  account  of  the  skew-
symmetry  of  the  tensor  (<£),  the  components  of  k  are  given
by  the  first  three  components  of  the  four-dimensional
vector

=  J v  (3^)

and  the  fourth  component  is  given  by

+  fy&J 2  fy&J 3  ~  "f"  =  ^  •  (37)


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


47


There  is,  therefore,  a  four-dimensional  vector  of  force  per
unit  volume,  whose  first  three  components,  kv  k.2)  k3,  are
the  ponderomotive  force  components  per  unit  volume,  and
whose  fourth  component  is  the  rate  of  working  of  the  field

per  unit  volume,  multiplied  by  ^  -  I.


A  comparison  of  (36)  and  (35)  shows  that  the  theory
of  relativity  formally  unites  the  ponderomotive  force  of
the  electric  field,  pe,  and  the  Biot-Savart  or  Lorentz
force  [i,  h].


48  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


Mass  and  Energy .  An  important  conclusion  can  be
drawn  from  the  existence  and  significance  of  the  4-vector
Let  us  imagine  a  body  upon  which  the  electro¬
magnetic  field  acts  for  a  time.  In  the  symbolic  figure
(Fig.  2)  Oxl  designates  the  ^-axis,  and  is  at  the  same
time  a  substitute  for  the  three  space  axes  Oxv  Ox2,  Oxs  ;
01  designates  the  real  time  axis.  In  this  diagram  a  body
of  finite  extent  is  represented,  at  a  definite  time  /,  by  the
interval  AB  ;  the  whole  space-time  existence  of  the  body
is  represented  by  a  strip  whose  boundary  is  everywhere
inclined  less  than  450  to  the  /-axis.  Between  the  time
sections,  l  =  and  /  =  /2,  but  not  extending  to  them,
a  portion  of  the  strip  is  shaded.  This  represents  the
portion  of  the  space-time  manifold  in  which  the  electro¬
magnetic  field  acts  upon  the  body,  or  upon  the  electric
charges  contained  in  it,  the  action  upon  them  being
transmitted  to  the  body.  We  shall  now  consider  the
changes  which  take  place  in  the  momentum  and  energy
of  the  body  as  a  result  of  this  action.

We  shall  assume  that  the  principles  of  momentum
and  energy  are  valid  for  the  body.  The  change  in
momentum,  A  IX)  A  ly,  A  A,  and  the  change  in  energy,  A  E,
are  then  given  by  the  expressions


‘1

M,  -  UW  Xdxdydz  —  Jr^K1dx1dx2dx3dx4
h


A  E  =


/o


~K \dxyix2dxzdx i


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


49


Since  the  four-dimensional  element  of  volume  is  an
invariant,  and  (Kv  K2,  K3,  W4)  forms  a  4-vector,  the  four-
dimensional  integral  extended  over  the  shaded  portion
transforms  as  a  4-vector,  as  does  also  the  integral  between
the  limits  /x  and  /2,  because  the  portion  of  the  region  which
is  not  shaded  contributes  nothing  to  the  integral.  It
follows,  therefore,  that  A/*,  A/v,  A I z,  i^E  form  a  4-vector.
Since  the  quantities  themselves  transform  in  the  same
way  as  their  increments,  it  follows  that  the  aggregate  of
the  four  quantities

A,  4  4  i E

has  itself  the  properties  of  a  vector;  these  quantities  are
referred  to  an  instantaneous  condition  of  the  body  (e.g.  at
the  time  l  =  4.

This  4-vector  may  also  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the
mass  ;//,  and  the  velocity  of  the  body,  considered  as  a
material  particle.  To  form  this  expression,  we  note  first,
that

-  ds°-  =  dr2  =  -  (dx2  +  dxd  +  dx2)  -  dx2  =  dl2{\  -  q2')  (38;

is  an  invariant  which  refers  to  an  infinitely  short  portion
of  the  four-dimensional  line  which  represents  the  motion
of  the  material  particle.  The  physical  significance  of  the
invariant  dr  may  easily  be  given.  If  the  time  axis  is
chosen  in  such  a  way  that  it  has  the  direction  of  the  line
differential  which  we  are  considering,  or,  in  other  words,
if  we  reduce  the  material  particle  to  rest,  we  shall  then
have  dr  =  dl ;  this  will  therefore  be  measured  by  the
light-seconds  clock  which  is  at  the  same  place,  and  at
rest  relatively  to  the  material  particle.  We  therefore  call
4


50  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


r  the  proper  time  of  the  material  particle.  As  opposed
to  dl ,  dr  is  therefore  an  invariant,  and  is  practically
equivalent  to  dl  for  motions  whose  velocity  is  small
compared  to  that  of  light.  Hence  we  see  that

•  •  •  (39)

dr

has,  just  as  the  dxvi  the  character  of  a  vector  ;  we  shall
designate  (uv)  as  the  four-dimensional  vector  (in  brief,
4-vector)  of  velocity.  Its  components  satisfy,  by  (38),
the  condition

=  - 1.  .  .  .  (40)

We  see  that  this  4-vector,  whose  components  in  the
ordinary  notation  are


Qx  Q  y  Q  s  i

T^l1’  Vi  -  7  7^1-  7^7


(41)


is  the  only  4-vector  which  can  be  formed  from  the  velocity
components  of  the  material  particle  which  are  defined  in
three  dimensions  by

_  dx  _  dy  _  dz

q*  ~  Jl'  ^  tl'  q’~  ic


We  therefore  see  that


(42)


must  be  that  4-vector  which  is  to  be  equated  to  the
4-vector  of  momentum  and  energy  whose  existence  we
have  proved  above.  By  equating  the  components,  we
obtain,  in  three-dimensional  notation,


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


51


L  =


x/1  "  f


E  =


in


n/I  -  ?2J


(43)


We  recognize,  in  fact,  that  these  components  of
momentum  agree  with  those  of  classical  mechanics  for
velocities  which  are  small  compared  to  that  of  light.  For
large  velocities  the  momentum  increases  more  rapidly
than  linearly  with  the  velocity,  so  as  to  become  infinite
on  approaching  the  velocity  of  light.

If  we  apply  the  last  of  equations  (43)  to  a  material
particle  at  rest  (q  =  o),  we  see  that  the  energy,  if0,  of  a
body  at  rest  is  equal  to  its  mass.  Had  we  chosen  the
second  as  our  unit  of  time,  we  would  have  obtained


E0  =  me1  .  .  .  (44)

Mass  and  energy  are  therefore  essentially  alike  ;  they  are
only  different  expressions  for  the  same  thing.  The  mass
of  a  body  is  not  a  constant ;  it  varies  with  changes  in  its
energy.*  We  see  from  the  last  of  equations  (43)  that  E
becomes  infinite  when  q  approaches  I,  the  velocity  of
light.  If  we  develop  E  in  powers  of  q 2,  we  obtain,


r*  in  o  3  4  /  v

E  =  m  +  —q*  +  | mq*  +  .  .  .  .  (45)

2  o

*  The  emission  of  energy  in  radioactive  processes  is  evidently  connected
with  the  fact  that  the  atomic  weights  are  not  integers.  Attempts  have
been  made  to  draw  conclusions  from  this  concerning  the  structure  and
stability  of  the  atomic  nuclei.


52  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


The  second  term  of  this  expansion  corresponds  to  the
kinetic  energy  of  the  material  particle  in  classical
mechanics.

Equations  of  Motion  of  Material  Particles.  From  (43)
we  obtain,  by  differentiating  by  the  time  /,  and  using
the  principle  of  momentum,  in  the  notation  of  three-
dimensional  vectors,


This  equation,  which  was  previously  employed  by
H.  A.  Lorentz  for  the  motion  of  electrons,  has  been
proved  to  be  true,  with  great  accuracy,  by  experiments
with  /5-rays.

Energy  Tensor  of  the  Electromagnetic  Field.  Before  the
development  of  the  theory  of  relativity  it  was  known
that  the  principles  of  energy  and  momentum  could
be  expressed  in  a  differential  form  for  the  electro¬
magnetic  field.  The  four-dimensional  formulation  of
these  principles  leads  to  an  important  conception,  that  of
the  energy  tensor,  which  is  important  for  the  further
development  of  the  theory  of  relativity.

If  in  the  expression  for  the  4-vector  of  force  per  unit
volume,


using  the  field  equations  (32),  we  express  in  terms  of
the  field  intensities,  we  obtain,  after  some  trans¬
formations  and  repeated  application  of  the  field  equations
(32)  and  (33),  the  expression


(47)


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


53


where  we  have  written  *


(48)


The  physical  meaning  of  equation  (47)  becomes  evident
if  in  place  of  this  equation  we  write,  using  a  new
notation,


iX  =


'tip  XX :

'tiP xy

tipxx

a(i^)

tix

•

1

•

•

1

tiz

m

•

Xis*)

•  •

2(1%)

2(>s.)

X  -  v )

dx

ti)y

tiz

2(10

(47a)


or,  on  eliminating  the  imaginary,


K


x  =


tip  XX

tip  xy

tip  XX

2£,

tix

tiz

ti/

y


•  •  •  •


tiSx

tiSy

tisx

tirj

tix

tiz

til

(47b)


When  expressed  in  the  latter  form,  we  see  that  the
first  three  equations  state  the  principle  of  momentum  ;
Pxx  •  •  •  pxx  are  the  Maxwell  stresses  in  the  electro¬
magnetic  field,  and  (bx,  byi  bz)  is  the  vector  momentum
per  unit  volume  of  the  field.  The  last  of  equations  (47b)
expresses  the  energy  principle;  s  is  the  vector  flow  of
energy,  and  77  the  energy  per  unit  volume  of  the  field.
In  fact,  we  get  from  (48)  by  introducing  the  well-known
expressions  for  the  components  of  the  field  intensity  from
electrodynamics,


*  To  be  summed  for  the  indices  a  and  /3,


54  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


pxx  —  —  +  -J(h*2  +  h/  +  hy)

-  exey  +  ie,2  +  e/  +  e,2)


1


P xy  ^hj/  P  xz

—  QxGy


-  hxhz


(48  a)


bx  sx  ©jhs  62  hy


We  conclude  from  (48)  that  the  energy  tensor  of  the
electromagnetic  field  is  symmetrical ;  with  this  is  con¬
nected  the  fact  that  the  momentum  per  unit  volume  and
the  flow  of  energy  are  equal  to  each  other  (relation
between  energy  and  inertia).

We  therefore  conclude  from  these  considerations  that
the  energy  per  unit  volume  has  the  character  of  a  tensor.
This  has  been  proved  directly  only  for  an  electromagnetic
field,  although  we  may  claim  universal  validity  for  it.
Maxwell’s  equations  determine  the  electromagnetic  field
when  the  distribution  of  electric  charges  and  currents  is
known.  But  we  do  not  know  the  laws  which  govern
the  currents  and  charges.  We  do  know,  indeed,  that
electricity  consists  of  elementary  particles  (electrons,
positive  nuclei),  but  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view  we
cannot  comprehend  this.  We  do  not  know  the  energy
factors  which  determine  the  distribution  of  electricity  in
particles  of  definite  size  and  charge,  and  all  attempts  to
complete  the  theory  in  this  direction  have  failed.  If  then
we  can  build  upon  Maxwell’s  equations  in  general,  the


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


55


energy  tensor  of  the  electromagnetic  field  is  known  only
outside  the  charged  particles.*  In  these  regions,  outside
of  charged  particles,  the  only  regions  in  which  we  can
believe  that  we  have  the  complete  expression  for  the
energy  tensor,  we  have,  by  (47),


IT,


txv


=  O


(47c)


General  Expressions  for  the  Conservation  Principles.  We
can  hardly  avoid  making  the  assumption  that  in  all  other
cases,  also,  the  space  distribution  of  energy  is  given  by  a
symmetrical  tensor,  T)X ,  and  that  this  complete  energy
tensor  everywhere  satisfies  the  relation  (47c).  At  any
rate  we  shall  see  that  by  means  of  this  assumption  we
obtain  the  correct  expression  for  the  integral  energy
principle.

Let  us  consider  a  spatially  bounded,  closed  system,
which,  four-dimensionally,  we  may  represent  as  a  strip,
outside  of  which  the  T^v  vanish.  Integrate  equation
(47c)  over  a  space  section.  Since  the  integrals  of


tT.


^1


r — ,  -r— ^ -  and  -r— 1 —  vanish  because  the  Tuv  vanish  at  the
oxl  ’  ^x»  Lr3  ^


limits  of  integration,  we  obtain


(I


57I  I  T^dxydx^


o


(49)


Inside  the  parentheses  are  the  expressions  for  the


*  It  has  been  attempted  to  remedy  this  lack  of  knowledge  by  considering
the  charged  particles  as  proper  singularities.  But  in  my  opinion  this  means
giving  up  a  real  understanding  of  the  structure  of  matter.  It  seems  to  me
much  better  to  give  in  to  our  present  inability  rather  than  to  be  satisfied
by  a  solution  that  is  only  apparent.


56  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY

momentum  of  the  whole  system,  multiplied  by  z,  together
with  the  negative  energy  of  the  system,  so  that  (49)
expresses  the  conservation  principles  in  their  integral
form.  That  this  gives  the  right  conception  of  energy  and

I


the  conservation  principles  will  be  seen  from  the  following
considerations.

Phenomenological  Representation  of  the
Energy  Tensor  of  Matter.

H ydrodynamical  Equations.  We  know  that  matter  is
built  up  of  electrically  charged  particles,  but  we  do  not


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


57


know  the  laws  which  govern  the  constitution  of  these
particles.  In  treating  mechanical  problems,  we  are  there¬
fore  obliged  to  make  use  of  an  inexact  description  of
matter,  which  corresponds  to  that  of  classical  mechanics.
The  density  <7,  of  a  material  substance  and  the  hydro-
dynamical  pressures  are  the  fundamental  concepts  upon
which  such  a  description  is  based.

Let  cr0  be  the  density  of  matter  at  a  place,  estimated
with  reference  to  a  system  of  co-ordinates  moving  with
the  matter.  Then  cr0,  the  density  at  rest,  is  an  invariant.
If  we  think  of  the  matter  in  arbitrary  motion  and  neglect
the  pressures  (particles  of  dust  in  vacuo ,  neglecting  the
size  of  the  particles  and  the  temperature),  then  the  energy
tensor  will  depend  only  upon  the  velocity  components,
uv  and  cr0.  We  secure  the  tensor  character  of  T^v  by
putting

T,V  &Q  M^jUy  .  .  .  (50)

in  which  the  u in  the  three-dimensional  representation,
are  given  by  (41).  In  fact,  it  follows  from  (50)  that  for
q  —  o,  7"44  =  -  <70  (equal  to  the  negative  energy  per  unit
volume),  as  it  should,  according  to  the  theorem  of  the
equivalence  of  mass  and  energy,  and  according  to  the
physical  interpretation  of  the  energy  tensor  given  above.
If  an  external  force  (four-dimensional  vector,  WJ  acts
upon  the  matter,  by  the  principles  of  momentum  and
energy  the  equation


58  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


must  hold.  We  shall  now  show  that  this  equation  leads
to  the  same  law  of  motion  of  a  material  particle  as  that
already  obtained.  Let  us  imagine  the  matter  to  be  of
infinitely  small  extent  in  space,  that  is,  a  four-dimensional
thread  ;  then  by  integration  over  the  whole  thread  with
respect  to  the  space  co-ordinates  a q,  x2,  ;r3,  we  obtain


^K‘1dx1dx2dx2


^dL*dx,  dx.dxo  =

J  Ltq  1  ^  3


.d
1 —

dl


dx,  dx.,  ,  j
dr  dr  123


Now  j dxYdxtflx%dx±  is  an  invariant,  as  is,  therefore,  also

r •

j (T^dx^dx^dx%dx^.  We  shall  calculate  this  integral,  first

with  respect  to  the  inertial  system  which  we  have  chosen,
and  second,  with  respect  to  a  system  relatively  to  which
the  matter  has  the  velocity  zero.  The  integration  is  to
be  extended  over  a  filament  of  the  thread  for  which  cr0
may  be  regarded  as  constant  over  the  whole  section.  If
the  space  volumes  of  the  filament  referred  to  the  two
systems  are  dV  and  dV0  respectively,  then  we  have


L0dV<il  =


[cr^dVfjdT


and  therefore  also


Jcr 0dV  =  =  jd/n  i


.  dr

dx \


If  we  substitute  the  right-hand  side  for  the  left-hand

,  .  dx

side  in  the  former  integral,  and  put  ~  outside  the  sign

dr


SPECIAL  RELATIVITY


59


of  integration,  we  obtain,

is  _  d(,Jx i\  _  d  (  m \

K *  ~  diK^)  ~  dkjnr?)

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  generalized  conception  of  the
energy  tensor  is  in  agreement  with  our  former  result.

The  Eulerian  Equations  for  Perfect  Fluids.  In  order
to  get  nearer  to  the  behaviour  of  real  matter  we  must  add
to  the  energy  tensor  a  term  which  corresponds  to  the
pressures.  The  simplest  case  is  that  of  a  perfect  fluid  in
which  the  pressure  is  determined  by  a  scalar  p.  Since
the  tangential  stresses  pxy,  etc.,  vanish  in  this  case,  the
contribution  to  the  energy  tensor  must  be  of  the  form
p8vll.  We  must  therefore  put

T ^  —  <?upuv  +  pS^  .  .  (5  0

At  rest,  the  density  of  the  matter,  or  the  energy  per  unit
volume,  is  in  this  case,  not  a  but  a  -  p.  For


( 7


dx 4  dx  i
dr  dr


a  -  p.


In  the  absence  of  any  force,  we  have


dT,


fXV


dx„


duu  d(auh)
<ruvZ — -  +  u)L  +


¥


dx,


dXv


dx,


=  o.


If  we  multiply  this  equation  by  ua
the  fs  we  obtain,  using  (40),


and  sum  for


60  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


where  we  have  put  This  is  the  equation  of


'bxfL  dr


dr


continuity,  which  differs  from  that  of  classical  mechanics

by  the  term  which,  practically,  is  vanishingly  small.
dr

Observing  (52),  the  conservation  principles  take  the  form


+  «,


dp

Ldr


+


The  equations  for  the  first  three  indices  evidently  corre¬
spond  to  the  Eulerian  equations.  That  the  equations
(52)  and  (53)  correspond,  to  a  first  approximation,  to  the
hydrodynamical  equations  of  classical  mechanics,  is  a
further  confirmation  of  the  generalized  energy  principle.
The  density  of  matter  and  of  energy  has  the  character  of
a  symmetrical  tensor.


LECTURE  III


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

ALL  of  the  previous  considerations  have  been  based
upon  the  assumption  that  all  inertial  systems  are
equivalent  for  the  description  of  physical  phenomena,  but
that  they  are  preferred,  for  the  formulation  of  the  laws
of  nature,  to  spaces  of  reference  in  a  different  state  of
motion.  We  can  think  of  no  cause  for  this  preference
for  definite  states  of  motion  to  all  others,  according  to
our  previous  considerations,  either  in  the  perceptible
bodies  or  in  the  concept  of  motion  ;  on  the  contrary,  it
must  be  regarded  as  an  independent  property  of  the
space-time  continuum.  The  principle  of  inertia,  in
particular,  seems  to  compel  us  to  ascribe  physically
objective  properties  to  the  space-time  continuum.  Just
as  it  was  necessary  from  the  Newtonian  standpoint  to
make  both  the  statements,  tempus  est  absolutum ,  spatium
est  absolutum ,  so  from  the  standpoint  of  the  special  theory
of  relativity  we  must  say,  continuum  spatii  et  temporis  est
absolutum.  In  this  latter  statement  absolutum  means  not
only  “physically  real,”  but  also  “independent  in  its
physical  properties,  having  a  physical  effect,  but  not  itself
influenced  by  physical  conditions.”

As  long  as  the  principle  of  inertia  is  regarded  as  the

61


62  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


keystone  of  physics,  this  standpoint  is  certainly  the  only
one  which  is  justified.  But  there  are  two  serious  criticisms
of  the  ordinary  conception.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  contrary
to  the  mode  of  thinking  in  science  to  conceive  of  a  thing
(the  space-time  continuum)  which  acts  itself,  but  which
cannot  be  acted  upon.  This  is  the  reason  why  E.  Mach
was  led  to  make  the  attempt  to  eliminate  space  as  an
active  cause  in  the  system  of  mechanics.  According  to
him,  a  material  particle  does  not  move  in  unaccelerated
motion  relatively  to  space,  but  relatively  to  the  centre  of
all  the  other  masses  in  the  universe;  in  this  way  the
series  of  causes  of  mechanical  phenomena  was  closed,  in
contrast  to  the  mechanics  of  Newton  and  Galileo.  In
order  to  develop  this  idea  within  the  limits  of  the  modern
theory  of  action  through  a  medium,  the  properties  of
the  space-time  continuum  which  determine  inertia  must
be  regarded  as  field  properties  of  space,  analogous  to
the  electromagnetic  field.  The  concepts  of  classical
mechanics  afford  no  way  of  expressing  this.  For  this
reason  Mach’s  attempt  at  a  solution  failed  for  the  time
being.  We  shall  come  back  to  this  point  of  view  later.
In  the  second  place,  classical  mechanics  indicates  a
limitation  which  directly  demands  an  extension  of  the
principle  of  relativity  to  spaces  of  reference  which  are  not
in  uniform  motion  relatively  to  each  other.  The  ratio  of
the  masses  of  two  bodies  is  defined  in  mechanics  in  two
ways  which  differ  from  each  other  fundamentally ;  in  the
first  place,  as  the  reciprocal  ratio  of  the  accelerations
which  the  same  motional  force  imparts  to  them  (inert
mass),  and  in  the  second  place,  as  the  ratio  of  the  forces


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


63


which  act  upon  them  in  the  same  gravitational  held
(gravitational  mass).  The  equality  of  these  two  masses,
so  differently  defined,  is  a  fact  which  is  confirmed  by
experiments  of  very  high  accuracy  (experiments  of  Edtvos),
and  classical  mechanics  offers  no  explanation  for  this
equality.  It  is,  however,  clear  that  science  is  fully  justified
in  assigning  such  a  numerical  equality  only  after  this
numerical  equality  is  reduced  to  an  equality  of  the  real
nature  of  the  two  concepts.

That  this  object  may  actually  be  attained  by  an  exten¬
sion  of  the  principle  of  relativity,  follows  from  the  follow¬
ing  consideration.  A  little  reflection  will  show  that  the
theorem  of  the  equality  of  the  inert  and  the  gravitational
mass  is  equivalent  to  the  theorem  that  the  acceleration
imparted  to  a  body  by  a  gravitational  field  is  independent
of  the  nature  of  the  body.  For  Newton’s  equation  of
motion  in  a  gravitational  field,  written  out  in  full,  is

(Inert  mass).  (Acceleration)  =  (Intensity  of  the

gravitational  field)  .  (Gravitational  mass).

It  is  only  when  there  is  numerical  equality  between  the
inert  and  gravitational  mass  that  the  acceleration  is  in¬
dependent  of  the  nature  of  the  body.  Let  now  K  be  an
inertial  system.  Masses  which  are  sufficiently  far  from
each  other  and  from  other  bodies  are  then,  with  respect
to  Y,  free  from  acceleration.  We  shall  also  refer  these
masses  to  a  system  of  co-ordinates  K\  uniformly  acceler¬
ated  with  respect  to  K.  Relatively  to  K'  all  the  masses
have  equal  and  parallel  accelerations  ;  with  respect  to  K'
they  behave  just  as  if  a  gravitational  field  were  present  and


64  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


K'  were  unaccelerated.  Overlooking  for  the  present  the
question  as  to  the  “  cause  ”  of  such  a  gravitational  field,
which  will  occupy  us  later,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent
our  conceiving  this  gravitational  field  as  real,  that  is,  the
conception  that  K'  is  “  at  rest  ”  and  a  gravitational  field
is  present  we  may  consider  as  equivalent  to  the  concep¬
tion  that  only  K  is  an  “  allowable  ”  system  of  co-ordinates
and  no  gravitational  field  is  present.  The  assumption  of
the  complete  physical  equivalence  of  the  systems  of  co¬
ordinates,  K  and  K\  we  call  the  “  principle  of  equival¬
ence;”  this  principle  is  evidently  intimately  connected
with  the  theorem  of  the  equality  between  the  inert  and
the  gravitational  mass,  and  signifies  an  extension  of  the
principle  of  relativity  to  co-ordinate  systems  which  are
in  non-uniform  motion  relatively  to  each  other.  In  fact,
through  this  conception  we  arrive  at  the  unity  of  the
nature  of  inertia  and  gravitation.  For  according  to  our
way  of  looking  at  it,  the  same  masses  may  appear  to  be
either  under  the  action  of  inertia  alone  (with  respect  to
K)  or  under  the  combined  action  of  inertia  and  gravita¬
tion  (with  respect  to  K).  The  possibility  of  explaining
the  numerical  equality  of  inertia  and  gravitation  by  the
unity  of  their  nature  gives  to  the  general  theory  of
relativity,  according  to  my  conviction,  such  a  superiority
over  the  conceptions  of  classical  mechanics,  that  all  the
difficulties  encountered  in  development  must  be  considered
as  small  in  comparison.

What  justifies  us  in  dispensing  with  the  preference
for  inertial  systems  over  all  other  co-ordinate  systems,  a
preference  that  seems  so  securely  established  by  experi-


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  65

ment  based  upon  the  principle  of  inertia  ?  The  weakness
of  the  principle  of  inertia  lies  in  this,  that  it  involves  an
argument  in  a  circle  :  a  mass  moves  without  acceleration
if  it  is  sufficiently  far  from  other  bodies;  we  know  that
it  is  sufficiently  far  from  other  bodies  only  by  the  fact
that  it  moves  without  acceleratioa  Are  there,  in  general,
any  inertial  systems  for  very  extended  portions  of  the
space-time  continuum,  or,  indeed,  for  the  whole  universe?
We  may  look  upon  the  principle  of  inertia  as  established,
to  a  high  degree  of  approximation,  for  the  space  of  our
planetary  system,  provided  that  we  neglect  the  perturba¬
tions  due  to  the  sun  and  planets.  Stated  more  exactly,
there  are  finite  regions,  where,  with  respect  to  a  suitably
chosen  space  of  reference,  material  particles  move  freely
without  acceleration,  and  in  which  the  laws  of  the  special
theory  of  relativity,  which  have  been  developed  above,
hold  with  remarkable  accuracy.  Such  regions  we  shall
call  “Galilean  regions.”  We  shall  proceed  from  the
consideration  of  such  regions  as  a  special  case  of  known
properties.

The  principle  of  equivalence  demands  that  in  dealing
with  Galilean  regions  we  may  equally  well  make  use  of
non-inertial  systems,  that  is,  such  co-ordinate  systems  as,
relatively  to  inertial  systems,  are  not  free  from  accelera¬
tion  and  rotation.  If,  further,  we  are  going  to  do  away
completely  with  the  difficult  question  as  to  the  objective
reason  for  the  preference  of  certain  systems  of  co-ordinates,
then  we  must  allow  the  use  of  arbitrarily  moving  systems
of  co-ordinates.  As  soon  as  we  make  this  attempt  seriously


5


66  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


we  come  into  conflict  with  that  physical  interpretation  of
space  and  time  to  which  we  were  led  by  the  special  theory
of  relativity.  For  let  K'  be  a  system  of  co-ordinates  whose
/-axis  coincides  with  the  -S'-axis  of  K ,  and  which  rotates
about  the  latter  axis  with  constant  angular  velocity.  Are
the  configurations  of  rigid  bodies,  at  rest  relatively  to  K\
in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  Euclidean  geometry?
Since  K'  is  not  an  inertial  system,  we  do  not  know
directly  the  laws  of  configuration  of  rigid  bodies  with
respect  to  K',  nor  the  laws  of  nature,  in  general.  But
we  do  know  these  laws  with  respect  to  the  inertial  system
K:  and  we  can  therefore  estimate  them  with  respect  to  K'.
Imagine  a  circle  drawn  about  the  origin  in  the  x'y  plane
of  K\  and  a  diameter  of  this  circle.  Imagine,  further,  that
we  have  given  a  large  number  of  rigid  rods,  all  equal  to
each  other.  We  suppose  these  laid  in  series  along  the
periphery  and  the  diameter  of  the  circle,  at  rest  relatively
to  K' .  If  U  is  the  number  of  these  rods  along  the  peri¬
phery,  D  the  number  along  the  diameter,  then,  if  K  does
not  rotate  relatively  to  K,  we  shall  have

U

d  ~ 77  •

But  if  K  rotates  we  get  a  different  result.  Suppose
that  at  a  definite  time  t}  of  K  we  determine  the  ends  of
all  the  rods.  With  respect  to  K  all  the  rods  upon  the
periphery  experience  the  Lorentz  contraction,  but  the
rods  upon  the  diameter  do  not  experience  this  contrac-


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


67


tion  (along  their  lengths  !).*  It  therefore  follows  that

U

D>lr ■

It  therefore  follows  that  the  laws  of  configuration  of
rigid  bodies  with  respect  to  K'  do  not  agree  with  the
laws  of  configuration  of  rigid  bodies  that  are  in  accord¬
ance  with  Euclidean  geometry.  If,  further,  we  place  two
similar  clocks  (rotating  withTT),  one  upon  the  periphery,
and  the  other  at  the  centre  of  the  circle,  then,  judged
from  Ky  the  clock  on  the  periphery  will  go  slower  than
the  clock  at  the  centre.  The  same  thing  must  take  place,
judged  from  K\  if  we  define  time  with  respect  to  K'  in
a  not  wholly  unnatural  way,  that  is,  in  such  a  way  that
the  laws  with  respect  to  K'  depend  explicitly  upon  the
time.  Space  and  time,  therefore,  cannot  be  defined
with  respect  to  K'  as  they  were  in  the  special  theory  of
relativity  with  respect  to  inertial  systems.  But,  accord¬
ing  to  the  principle  of  equivalence,  K'  is  also  to  be  con¬
sidered  as  a  system  at  rest,  with  respect  to  which  there
is  a  gravitational  field  (field  of  centrifugal  force,  and
force  of  Coriolis).  We  therefore  arrive  at  the  result :
the  gravitational  field  influences  and  even  determines  the
metrical  laws  of  the  space-time  continuum.  If  the  laws
of  configuration  of  ideal  rigid  bodies  are  to  be  expressed
geometrically,  then  in  the  presence  of  a  gravitational
field  the  geometry  is  not  Euclidean.

*  These  considerations  assume  that  the  behaviour  of  rods  and  clocks
depends  only  upon  velocities,  and  not  upon  accelerations,  or,  at  least,  that
the  influence  of  acceleration  does  not  counteract  that  of  velocity.


68  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


The  case  that  we  have  been  considering  is  analogous
to  that  which  is  presented  in  the  two-dimensional  treat¬
ment  of  surfaces.  It  is  impossible  in  the  latter  case
also,  to  introduce  co-ordinates  on  a  surface  (e.g.  the
surface  of  an  ellipsoid)  which  have  a  simple  metrical
significance,  while  on  a  plane  the  Cartesian  co-ordinates,
xv  x2,  signify  directly  lengths  measured  by  a  unit
measuring  rod.  Gauss  overcame  this  difficulty,  in  his
theory  of  surfaces,  by  introducing  curvilinear  co-ordinates
which,  apart  from  satisfying  conditions  of  continuity,
were  wholly  arbitrary,  and  afterwards  these  co-ordinates
were  related  to  the  metrical  properties  of  the  surface.
In  an  analogous  way  we  shall  introduce  in  the  general
theory  of  relativity  arbitrary  co-ordinates,  xv  x2,  xv  x^
which  shall  number  uniquely  the  space-time  points,  so
that  neighbouring  events  are  associated  with  neighbour¬
ing  values  of  the  co-ordinates  ;  otherwise,  the  choice  of
co-ordinates  is  arbitrary.  We  shall  be  true  to  the
principle  of  relativity  in  its  broadest  sense  if  we  give
such  a  form  to  the  laws  that  they  are  valid  in  every
such  four-dimensional  system  of  co-ordinates,  that  is,  if
the  equations  expressing  the  laws  are  co-variant  with
respect  to  arbitrary  transformations.

The  most  important  point  of  contact  between  Gauss’s
theory  of  surfaces  and  the  general  theory  of  relativity
lies  in  the  metrical  properties  upon  which  the  concepts
of  both  theories,  in  the  main,  are  based.  In  the  case
of  the  theory  of  surfaces,  Gauss’s  argument  is  as  follows.
Plane  geometry  may  be  based  upon  the  concept  of  the
distance  ds,  between  two  indefinitely  near  points.  The


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


69


concept  of  this  distance  is  physically  significant  because
the  distance  can  be  measured  directly  by  means  of  a
rigid  measuring  rod.  By  a  suitable  choice  of  Cartesian
co-ordinates  this  distance  may  be  expressed  by  the
formula  ds2  =  dx 2  +  dx 22.  We  may  base  upon  this
quantity  the  concepts  of  the  straight  line  as  the  geodesic
(h\ds  =  o),  the  interval,  the  circle,  and  the  angle,  upon
which  the  Euclidean  plane  geometry  is  built.  A
geometry  may  be  developed  upon  another  continuously
curved  surface,  if  we  observe  that  an  infinitesimally
small  portion  of  the  surface  may  be  regarded  as  plane,
to  within  relatively  infinitesimal  quantities.  There  are
Cartesian  co-ordinates,  Xlt  X%t  upon  such  a  small
portion  of  the  surface,  and  the  distance  between  two
points,  measured  by  a  measuring  rod,  is  given  by

ds1  =  dX ,2  +  dX*.

If  we  introduce  arbitrary  curvilinear  co-ordinates,  xY,  x2 ,
on  the  surface,  then  dXlt  dX2 ,  may  be  expressed  linearly
in  terms  of  dxlt  dx2.  Then  everywhere  upon  the  sur¬
face  we  have

ds2  =  gndx^  +  2gudx1dx2  +  g^dxg

where  gn,  g12,  g22  are  determined  by  the  nature  of  the
surface  and  the  choice  of  co-ordinates  ;  if  these  quantities
are  known,  then  it  is  also  known  how  networks  of  rigid
rods  may  be  laid  upon  the  surface.  In  other  words,  the
geometry  of  surfaces  may  be  based  upon  this  expression
for  ds 2  exactly  as  plane  geometry  is  based  upon  the
corresponding  expression.

There  are  analogous  relations  in  the  four-dimensional


70  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


space-time  continuum  of  physics.  In  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  an  observer,  falling  freely  in  a  gravi¬
tational  field,  there  exists  no  gravitational  field.  We
can  therefore  always  regard  an  infinitesimally  small
region  of  the  space-time  continuum  as  Galilean.  For
such  an  infinitely  small  region  there  will  be  an  inertial
system  (with  the  space  co-ordinates,  Xlt  X2,  AG,  and  the
time  co-ordinate  A”4)  relatively  to  which  we  are  to  regard
the  laws  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity  as  valid.  The
quantity  which  is  directly  measurable  by  our  unit
measuring  rods  and  clocks,

dx2  +  dX A  +  dX 32  -  dX2
or  its  negative,

ds1  =  -  dX2  -  dX2  -  dX2  +  dX 2  .  (54)

is  therefore  a  uniquely  determinate  invariant  for  two
neighbouring  events  (points  in  the  four-dimensional
continuum),  provided  that  we  use  measuring  rods  that
are  equal  to  each  other  when  brought  together  and
superimposed,  and  clocks  whose  rates  are  the  same
when  they  are  brought  together.  In  this  the  physical
assumption  is  essential  that  the  relative  lengths  of  two
measuring  rods  and  the  relative  rates  of  two  clocks  are
independent,  in  principle,  of  their  previous  history.  But
this  assumption  is  certainly  warranted  by  experience;
if  it  did  not  hold  there  could  be  no  sharp  spectral  lines  ;
for  the  single  atoms  of  the  same  element  certainly  do
not  have  the  same  history,  and  it  would  be  absurd  to
suppose  any  relative  difference  in  the  structure  of  the


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


71


single  atoms  due  to  their  previous  history  if  the  mass
and  frequencies  of  the  single  atoms  of  the  same  element
were  always  the  same.

Space-time  regions  of  finite  extent  are,  in  general,
not  Galilean,  so  that  a  gravitational  field  cannot  be  done
away  with  by  any  choice  of  co-ordinates  in  a  finite
region.  There  is,  therefore,  no  choice  of  co-ordinates
for  which  the  metrical  relations  of  the  special  theory  of
relativity  hold  in  a  finite  region.  But  the  invariant  ds
always  exists  for  two  neighbouring  points  (events)  of
the  continuum.  This  invariant  ds  may  be  expressed  in
arbitrary  co-ordinates.  If  one  observes  that  the  local
dXv  may  be  expressed  linearly  in  terms  of  the  co¬
ordinate  differentials  dx„  ds 2  may  be  expressed  in  the
form

ds1  =  g^dx/lXy  .  .  •  (55)

The  functions  g^v  describe,  with  respect  to  the  arbit¬
rarily  chosen  system  of  co-ordinates,  the  metrical  rela¬
tions  of  the  space-time  continuum  and  also  the
gravitational  field.  As  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity,
we  have  to  discriminate  between  time-like  and  space¬
like  line  elements  in  the  four-dimensional  continuum  ;
owing  to  the  change  of  sign  introduced,  time-like
line  elements  have  a  real,  space-like  line  elements  an
imaginary  ds.  The  time-like  ds  can  be  measured  directly
by  a  suitably  chosen  clock.

According  to  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  that
the  formulation  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity
assumes  a  generalization  of  the  theory  of  invariants  and
the  theory  of  tensors;  the  question  is  raised  as  to  the


72  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


form  of  the  equations  which  are  co-variant  with  respect
to  arbitrary  point  transformations.  The  generalized
calculus  of  tensors  was  developed  by  mathematicians
long  before  the  theory  of  relativity.  Riemann  first
extended  Gauss’s  train  of  thought  to  continua  of  any
number  of  dimensions ;  with  prophetic  vision  he  saw
the  physical  meaning  of  this  generalization  of  Euclid’s
geometry.  Then  followed  the  development  of  the  theory
in  the  form  of  the  calculus  of  tensors,  particularly  by
Ricci  and  Levi-Civita.  This  is  the  place  for  a  brief
presentation  of  the  most  important  mathematical  con¬
cepts  and  operations  of  this  calculus  of  tensors.

We  designate  four  quantities,  which  are  defined  as
functions  of  the  xv  with  respect  to  every  system  of  co¬
ordinates,  as  components,  Auy  of  a  contra-variant  vector,
if  they  transform  in  a  change  of  co-ordinates  as  the  co¬
ordinate  differentials  dxv.  We  therefore  have


(W

A*'  =  z-^A\


(so


Besides  these  contra-variant  vectors,  there  are  also  co¬
variant  vectors.  If  Bv  are  the  components  of  a  co-variant
vector,  these  vectors  are  transformed  according  to  the
rule


B\  =


(57)


The  definition  of  a  co-variant  vector  is  chosen  in  such  a
way  that  a  co-variant  vector  and  a  contra-variant  vector
together  form  a  scalar  according  to  the  scheme,


< ft  =  BVAV  (summed  over  the  v).


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


73


Accordingly,


B\A*'  =  ^


~dx


BA f*  =  BnA \


p


In  particular,  the  derivatives  of  a  scalar  6,  are  com-

ponents  of  a  co-variant  vector,  which,  with  the  co-ordinate

differentials,  form  the  scalar  ;  we  see  from  this

tea

example  how  natural  is  the  definition  of  the  co-variant
vectors.

There  are  here,  also,  tensors  of  any  rank,  which  may
have  co-variant  or  contra-variant  character  with  respect
to  each  index  ;  as  with  vectors,  the  character  is  desig¬
nated  by  the  position  of  the  index.  For  example,  A /
denotes  a  tensor  of  the  second  rank,  which  is  co-variant
with  respect  to  the  index  /i,  and  contra-variant  with  re¬
spect  to  the  index  v.  The  tensor  character  indicates
that  the  equation  of  transformation  is


^  a'


(58)


Tensors  may  be  formed  by  the  addition  and  subtraction
of  tensors  of  equal  rank  and  like  character,  as  in  the
theory  of  invariants  of  orthogonal  linear  substitutions,  for
example,

a;  +  b;=  q.  .  .  .  (59)

The  proof  of  the  tensor  character  of  C*  depends  upon  (58).

Tensors  may  be  formed  by  multiplication,  keeping  the
character  of  the  indices,  just  as  in  the  theory  of  invariants
of  linear  orthogonal  transformations,  for  example,

.  (60)


rv

'■''/ACTT*


74  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


The  proof  follows  directly  from  the  rule  of  transforma¬
tion.

Tensors  may  be  formed  by  contraction  with  respect  to
two  indices  of  different  character,  for  example,

A%t  =  BaT.  .  .  .  (6 1 )

The  tensor  character  of  A£ar  determines  the  tensor
character  of  BaT.  Proof —


_  3*.  3£V


Lrs  ~dXt
~dx'a  dx'T


a

ast •


The  properties  of  symmetry  and  skew-symmetry  of  a
tensor  with  respect  to  two  indices  of  like  character  have
the  same  significance  as  in  the  theory  of  invariants.

With  this,  everything  essential  has  been  said  with
regard  to  the  algebraic  properties  of  tensors.

The  Fundamental  Tensor.  It  follows  from  the  invari¬
ance  of  ds 2  for  an  arbitrary  choice  of  the  dxv,  in  connexion
with  the  condition  of  symmetry  consistent  with  (55),  that
the  g^v  are  components  of  a  symmetrical  co-variant  tensor
(Fundamental  Tensor).  Let  us  form  the  determinant,
g,  of  the  g^vi  and  also  the  minors,  divided  by  g,  cor¬
responding  to  the  single  g^.  These  minors,  divided  by
g}  will  be  denoted  by  g and  their  co-variant  character
is  not  yet  known.  Then  we  have


O'


<rtf  =  =  1  Ur  a  7  ^

a  O  if  a  ft


(62)


If  we  form  the  infinitely  small  quantities  (co-variant
vectors)

—  g^oF^o.  •  •  •  (^3)


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  75


multiply  by  g'x&  and  sum  over  the  //,,  we  obtain,  by  the
use  of  (62),

dxi  =  g^d^.  .  .  ■  (64)

Since  the  ratios  of  the  d^  are  arbitrary,  and  the  dx$  as
well  as  the  dx^  are  components  of  vectors,  it  follows  that
the  g*v  are  the  components  of  a  contra-variant  tensor  *
(contra-variant  fundamental  tensor).  The  tensor  character
of  Sf  (mixed  fundamental  tensor)  accordingly  follows,
by  (62).  By  means  of  the  fundamental  tensor,  instead
of  tensors  with  co-variant  index  character,  we  can
introduce  tensors  with  contra-variant  index  character,
and  conversely.  For  example,

=  g»*Aa

A  =

Ta  =  .

fJ-  5  fj-v

Volume  Invariants.  The  volume  element


S  dxYdx.L  dxzdxA  =  dx

is  not  an  invariant.  For  by  Jacobi’s  theorem,


dx  =


dx’*

dx.


dx.


(65)


&

*  If  we  multiply  (64)  by  ,  sum  over  the  £,  and  replace  the  dj-n  by  a
transformation  to  the  accented  system,  we  obtain


dx'a


dx'q-  'dx'a
dx^  dxp


g^civ


<T •


The  statement  made  above  follows  from  this,  since,  by  (64),  we  must  also
have  dx'a  =  g^'d}-' a ,  and  both  equations  must  hold  for  every  choice  of  the

d£'cr.


76  THE  WEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


But  we  can  complement  dx  so  that  it  becomes  an  in¬
variant.  If  we  form  the  determinant  of  the  quantities


,  ^xa  Dx,,

~  ix'^  7>x'g^

we  obtain,  by  a  double  application  of  the  theorem  of
multiplication  of  determinants,


O'

a


cr

<b  MV


We  therefore  get  the  invariant,


Jgdx  =  Jgdx.


Formation  of  Te?isors  by  Differentiation.  Although
the  algebraic  operations  of  tensor  formation  have  proved
to  be  as  simple  as  in  the  special  case  of  invariance  with
respect  to  linear  orthogonal  transformations,  nevertheless
in  the  general  case,  the  invariant  differential  operations
are,  unfortunately,  considerably  more  complicated.  The
reason  for  this  is  as  follows.  If  A *  is  a  contra-variant

vector,  the  coefficients  of  its  transformation,  are  in-

Dxv

dependent  of  position  only  if  the  transformation  is  a  linear

DA*

one.  For  then  the  vector  components,  A*  +  — — dx a,  at

oXa

a  neighbouring  point  transform  in  the  same  way  as  the
A*,  from  which  follows  the  vector  character  of  the  vector


differentials,  and  the  tensor  character  of


DA*


Dxf

Dxv


are  variable  this  is  no  longer  true.


But  if  the


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


77


That  there  are,  nevertheless,  in  the  general  case,  in¬
variant  differential  operations  for  tensors,  is  recognized
most  satisfactorily  in  the  following  way,  introduced  by
Levi-Civita  and  Weyl.  Let  (A*)  be  a  contra -variant  vector
whose  components  are  given  with  respect  to  the  co¬
ordinate  system  of  the  xv.  Let  P1  and  P2  be  two  in¬
finitesimally  near  points  of  the  continuum.  For  the
infinitesimal  region  surrounding  the  point  Pv  there  is,
according  to  our  way  of  considering  the  matter,  a  co¬
ordinate  system  of  the  Xv  (with  imaginary  ^-co¬
ordinates)  for  which  the  continuum  is  Euclidean.  Let
A fx)  be  the  co-ordinates  of  the  vector  at  the  point  Pv
Imagine  a  vector  drawn  at  the  point  Pv  using  the  local
system  of  the  Xv,  with  the  same  co-ordinates  (parallel
vector  through  P^)}  then  this  parallel  vector  is  uniquely
determined  by  the  vector  at  P1  and  the  displacement.
We  designate  this  operation,  whose  uniqueness  will  appear
in  the  sequel,  the  parallel  displacement  of  the  vector  An
from  P1  to  the  infinitesimally  near  point  P2  If  we  form
the  vector  difference  of  the  vector  (A*)  at  the  point  P2
and  the  vector  obtained  by  parallel  displacement  from  Px
to  P2,  we  get  a  vector  which  may  be  regarded  as  the
differential  of  the  vector  ( A for  the  given  displacement
(dx,).

This  vector  displacement  can  naturally  also  be  con¬
sidered  with  respect  to  the  co-ordinate  system  of  the  xv.
If  Av  are  the  co-ordinates  of  the  vector  at  Plf  Av  +  &AV
the  co-ordinates  of  the  vector  displaced  to  P2  along  the
interval  (dxv),  then  the  SAU  do  not  vanish  in  this  case.
We  know  of  these  quantities,  which  do  not  have  a  vector


78  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


character,  that  they  must  depend  linearly  and  homo¬
geneously  upon  the  dxv  and  the  Av .  We  therefore  put

SAV  =  -  T^A'dxp  .  .  (67)

In  addition,  we  can  state  that  the  Tvap  must  be  sym¬
metrical  with  respect  to  the  indices  a  and  {3.  For  we
can  assume  from  a  representation  by  the  aid  of  a  Euclid¬
ean  system  of  local  co-ordinates  that  the  same  parallelo¬
gram  will  be  described  by  the  displacement  of  an  element
d[1)xv  along  a  second  element  d^xv  as  by  a  displacement
of  d^xv  along  d^xv.  We  must  therefore  have

d^\xv  +  (d[X)xv  -  T^K^Xp)

=  d{1)xv  +  (d[~)xv  -  V^xj^xp).

The  statement  made  above  follows  from  this,  after  inter¬
changing  the  indices  of  summation,  a  and  /3,  on  the
right-hand  side.

Since  the  quantities  g^v  determine  all  the  metrical
properties  of  the  continuum,  they  must  also  determine
the  T^.  If  we  consider  the  invariant  of  the  vector  Av,
that  is,  the  square  of  its  magnitude,

g^A”

which  is  an  invariant,  this  cannot  change  in  a  parallel
displacement.  We  therefore  have

o  =  S(g^A»A')  =  jgA*A"dxa  +  g^A^SA*  +  g^ASA*
or,  by  (67),

-  g^ri  ~  g^K)^A”dxa  =  o.


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  79


Owing  to  the  symmetry  of  the  expression  in  the
brackets  with  respect  to  the  indices  and  v ,  this  equation
can  be  valid  for  an  arbitrary  choice  of  the  vectors  ( A a)
and  dxv  only  when  the  expression  in  the  brackets  vanishes
for  all  combinations  of  the  indices.  By  a  cyclic  inter¬
change  of  the  indices  fi,  v ,  a,  we  obtain  thus  altogether
three  equations,  from  which  we  obtain,  on  taking  into
account  the  symmetrical  property  of  the

•  •  •  (68)

in  which,  following  Christoffel,  the  abbreviation  has  been
used,


If  we  multiply  (68)  by  gacr  and  sum  over  the  a,  we
obtain


(70)


in  which  {'7}  is  the  Christoffel  symbol  of  the  second
kind.  Thus  the  quantities  T  are  deduced  from  the  g^v.
Equations  (67)  and  (70)  are  the  foundation  for  the
following  discussion.

Co-variant  Differentiation  of  Tensors.  If  (A11  +  SAf  is
the  vector  resulting  from  an  infinitesimal  parallel  displace¬
ment  from  P1  to  P 2,  and  ( A “  +  dA the  vector  A*  at  the
point  P2l  then  the  difference  of  these  two,


dA*  -  8A *  =


+  Y^A^dX"


80  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


is  also  a  vector.  Since  this  is  the  case  for  an  arbitrary
choice  of  the  dxvi  it  follows  that


A <7


' dA fX


(7 1)


is  a  tensor,  which  we  designate  as  the  co-variant  derivative
of  the  tensor  of  the  first  rank  (vector).  Contracting  this
tensor,  we  obtain  the  divergence  of  the  contra-variant
tensor  A\  In  this  we  must  observe  that  according  to
(70),


If  we  put,  further,


()  gr

_  JL  rr<ra  <7>  (Ta

2a


JL  h/A

*Jg


A*  Jg  =  B*


(72)

(73)


a  quantity  designated  by  Weyl  as  the  contra-variant  tensor
density  *  of  the  first  rank,  it  follows  that,


^

is  a  scalar  density.

We  get  the  law  of  parallel  displacement  for  the
co-variant  vector  Z?  by  stipulating  that  the  parallel
displacement  shall  be  effected  in  such  a  way  that  the
scalar


cf)  =  A^B^


remains  unchanged,  and  that  therefore


Ar-ZBp  +


*This  expression  is  justified,  in  that  Av-Jgdx  =  21  ^dx  has  a  tensor
character.  Every  tensor,  when  multiplied  by  Jg,  changes  into  a  tensor
density.  We  employ  capital  Gothic  letters  for  tensor  densities.


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


81


vanishes  for  every  value  assigned  to  (A"-).  We  therefore
get

BBP  =  ri„AJx„.  .  .  .  (75)

From  this  we  arrive  at  the  co-variant  derivative  of  the
co-variant  vector  by  the  same  process  as  that  which  led
to  (71),

bp,  <T  -  ¥?*  -  r %bv  .  .  (76)

ox9

By  interchanging  the  indices  ^  and  a,  and  subtracting,
we  get  the  skew-symmetrical  tensor,


tea


te>a

te^


(77)


For  the  co-variant  differentiation  of  tensors  of  the
second  and  higher  ranks  we  may  use  the  process  by
which  (75)  was  deduced.  Let,  for  example,  ( A ar)  be  a
co- variant  tensor  of  the  second  rank.  Then  A^E^F7  is
a  scalar,  if  E  and  F  are  vectors.  This  expression  must
not  be  changed  by  the  8-displacement ;  expressing  this
by  a  formula,  we  get,  using  (67),  SA aT,  whence  we  get  the
desired  co-variant  derivative,


A


'bA


CTT


or;  p


ten


_  r,a  A  —  Pa  A

A  ( Tp**-1  aT  A  Tp


era •


•  (78)


In  order  that  the  general  law  of  co-variant  differ¬
entiation  of  tensors  may  be  clearly  seen,  we  shall  write
down  two  co-variant  derivatives  deduced  in  an  analogous
way :


Al.a

...  aA;

a ,  p

tep

a*:

'dA(TT

.  p

-  ra  AT  +  TT  Aa

A  apxxa  *  A  apx±(T

+  +  F'pA™.


(79)

(So)


6


82  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


The  general  law  of  formation  now  becomes  evident.
From  these  formulae  we  shall  deduce  some  others  which
are  of  interest  for  the  physical  applications  of  the  theory.
In  case  Aar  is  skew-symmetrical,  we  obtain  the  tensor


A


arp


+  3^  +  3  AfT
~bxp  ~bx,  ixT


(8 1 )


which  is  skew-symmetrical  in  all  pairs  of  indices,  by  cyclic
interchange  and  addition.

If,  in  (78),  we  replace  Aar  by  the  fundamental  tensor*
gaT,  then  the  right-hand  side  vanishes  identically  ;  an
analogous  statement  holds  for  (80)  with  respect  to  g aT ;
that  is,  the  co-variant  derivatives  of  the  fundamental
tensor  vanish.  That  this  must  be  so  we  see  directly  in
the  local  system  of  co-ordinates.

In  case  AaT  is  skew-symmetrical,  we  obtain  from  (80),
by  contraction  with  respect  to  t  and  p,


(82)


In  the  general  case,  from  (79)  and  (80),  by  contraction
with  respect  to  t  and  p,  we  obtain  the  equations,


=  Tiffri.  .  .  (83)

dXa

a-  =  ^  .  .  (84)

The  Riemann  Tensor .  If  we  have  given  a  curve  ex¬
tending  from  the  point  P  to  the  point  G  of  the  continuum,
then  a  vector  A*,  given  at  P,  may,  by  a  parallel  displace¬
ment,  be  moved  along  the  curve  to  G.  If  the  continuum


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


83


is  Euclidean  (more  generally,  if  by  a  suitable  choice  of
co-ordinates  the^v  are  constants)  then  the  vector  obtained
at  G  as  a  result  of  this  displacement  does  not  depend
upon  the  choice  of  the  curve  joining  P  and  G.  But
otherwise,  the  result  depends  upon  the  path  of  the  dis¬
placement.  In  this  case,  therefore,  a  vector  suffers  a
change,  A A*  (in  its  direction,  not  its  magnitude),  when  it
is  carried  from  a  point  P  of  a  closed  curve,  along  the


Q


curve,  and  back  to  P.  We  shall  now  calculate  this  vector
change :


A  A*  =


As  in  Stokes’  theorem  for  the  line  integral  of  a  vector
around  a  closed  curve,  this  problem  may  be  reduced  to
the  integration  around  a  closed  curve  with  infinitely  small
linear  dimensions ;  we  shall  limit  ourselves  to  this  case.


84  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


We  have,  first,  by  (67),


A  A*  =


/»

T%Aad*p

a

0


In  this,  Tjjg  is  the  value  of  this  quantity  at  the  variable
point  G  of  the  path  of  integration.  If  vve  put


Z!L  ~  (xv)g  ~  (xv)p

and  denote  the  value  of  Y^p  at  P  by  T^,  then  we  have,
with  sufficient  accuracy,

-  7nTva

"PM  _  pM  1  UJ-
L<*  “  ^  +  ■

Let,  further,  Aa  be  the  value  obtained  from  Aa  by  a
parallel  displacement  along  the  curve  from  P  to  G.  It
may  now  easily  be  proved  by  means  of  (67)  that  A M  -  A*
is  infinitely  small  of  the  first  order,  while,  for  a  curve  of
infinitely  small  dimensions  of  the  first  order,  A A*  is
infinitely  small  of  the  second  order.  Therefore  there  is
an  error  of  only  the  second  order  if  we  put

Aa  =  ~A*  -  f lTA~aF-

If  we  introduce  these  values  of  Y^p  and  Aa  into  the
integral,  we  obtain,  neglecting  all  quantities  of  a  higher
order  of  small  quantities  than  the  second,


a  a*  =  -  gy  -  .  (85)

0

The  quantity  removed  from  under  the  sign  of  integration


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


85


refers  to  the  point  P.  Subtracting  from  the

integrand,  we  obtain

o

This  skew-symmetrical  tensor  of  the  second  rank,  faPi
characterizes  the  surface  element  bounded  by  the  curve
in  magnitude  and  position.  If  the  expression  in  the
brackets  in  (85)  were  skew-symmetrical  with  respect  to
the  indices  a  and  ft,  we  could  conclude  its  tensor  char¬
acter  from  (85).  We  can  accomplish  this  by  interchanging
the  summation  indices  a  and  ft  in  (85)  and  adding  the
resulting  equation  to  (85).  We  obtain

2AA*  =  -  R\ *TmfiA*f+  .  .  (86)

in  which

ra  >

+  W,  -  r&rk  (87)


The  tensor  character  of  follows  from  (86) ;  this  is
the  Riemann  curvature  tensor  of  the  fourth  rank,  whose
properties  of  symmetry  we  do  not  need  to  go  into.  Its
vanishing  is  a  sufficient  condition  (disregarding  the  reality
of  the  chosen  co-ordinates)  that  the  continuum  is
Euclidean.

By  contraction  of  the  Riemann  tensor  with  respect  to
the  indices  fi,  ft,  we  obtain  the  symmetrical  tensor  of  the
second  rank,


=


ar;„


+  r^r?


va


+


ar;„


pa  p/3
A  1 aj 3‘


(88)


The  last  two  terms  vanish  if  the  system  of  co-ordinates


86  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


is  so  chosen  that^  =  constant.  From  R^v  we  can  form
the  scalar,

R  =  •  •  •  (89)


Straightest  ( Geodetic )  Lines.  A  line  may  be  constructed
in  such  a  way  that  its  successive  elements  arise  from  each
other  by  parallel  displacements.  This  is  the  natural
generalization  of  the  straight  line  of  the  Euclidean
geometry.  For  such  a  line,  we  have


The  left-hand  side  is  to  be  replaced  by


ds1 ’


so  that  we


have


+


dxa  dxp
ds  ds


o.


(90)


We  get  the  same  line  if  we  find  the  line  which  gives  a
stationary  value  to  the  integral


[ds  or  L/.


g^dx^dx.


between  two  points  (geodetic  line).


*  The  direction  vector  at  a  neighbouring  point  of  the  curve  results,  by  a
parallel  displacement  along  the  line  element  (<^^),  from  the  direction  vector
of  each  point  considered.


LECTURE  IV


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY

( Continued)


WE  are  now  in  possession  of  the  mathematical
apparatus  which  is  necessary  to  formulate  the
laws  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  No  attempt
will  be  made  in  this  presentation  at  systematic  complete¬
ness,  but  single  results  and  possibilities  will  be  devel¬
oped  progressively  from  what  is  known  and  from  the
results  obtained.  Such  a  presentation  is  most  suited
to  the  present  provisional  state  of  our  knowledge.

A  material  particle  upon  which  no  force  acts  moves,
according  to  the  principle  of  inertia,  uniformly  in  a
straight  line.  In  the  four-dimensional  continuum  of  the
special  theory  of  relativity  (with  real  time  co-ordinate)
this  is  a  real  straight  line.  The  natural,  that  is,  the
simplest,  generalization  of  the  straight  line  which  is
plausible  in  the  system  of  concepts  of  Riemann’s  general
theory  of  invariants  is  that  of  the  straightest,  or  geodetic,
line.  We  shall  accordingly  have  to  assume,  in  the  sense
of  the  principle  of  equivalence,  that  the  motion  of  a
material  particle,  under  the  action  only  of  inertia  and
gravitation,  is  described  by  the  equation,


ds 2


dxadx{ 3
+  l^ds  ds


87


o.


88  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


In  fact,  this  equation  reduces  to  that  of  a  straight  line
if  all  the  components,  of  the  gravitational  field

vanish.

How  are  these  equations  connected  with  Newton’s
equations  of  motion?  According  to  the  special  theory
of  relativity,  the  g^v  as  well  as  the  g^v,  have  the  values,
with  respect  to  an  inertial  system  (with  real  time  co¬
ordinate  and  suitable  choice  of  the  sign  of  ds 2),

-  i  o  o

o-i  o

o  o  -  i

ooo


o

o

o

i


•  (91)


The  equations  of  motion  then  become


ds 2


=  o.


We  shall  call  this  the  “  first  approximation  ”  to  the  g!XV-
field.  In  considering  approximations  it  is  often  useful,
as  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  to  use  an  imaginary
^-co-ordinate,  as  then  the  g fJLV,  to  the  first  approxima¬
tion,  assume  the  values


(91a)


These  values  may  be  collected  in  the  relation

cr  —  —  $

&  fj-v  '-'txv'

To  the  second  approximation  we  must  then  put

S>y,v  —  “b  ’


(92)


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


89


where  the  y^v  are  to  be  regarded  as  small  of  the  first
order.

Both  terms  of  our  equation  of  motion  are  then  small
of  the  first  order.  If  we  neglect  terms  which,  relatively
to  these,  are  small  of  the  first  order,  we  have  to  put


1  /dyaj8

2  \  'bxtL


We  shall  now  introduce  an  approximation  of  a  second
kind.  Let  the  velocity  of  the  material  particles  be  very
small  compared  to  that  of  light.  Then  ds  will  be  the

dxx  dx^  dx3

same  as  the  time  differential,  dl.  Further,

will  vanish  compared  to  We  shall  assume,  in  addi¬

tion,  that  the  gravitational  field  varies  so  little  with  the
time  that  the  derivatives  of  the  y^v  by  xi  may  be
neglected.  Then  the  equation  of  motion  (for  fi=  I,  2,  3)
reduces  to


d2x,


V-


dl1


Lr^\  2  /


(90a)


This  equation  is  identical  with  Newton’s  equation  of
motion  for  a  material  particle  in  a  gravitational  field,  if

we  identify  with  the  potential  of  the  gravitational

field  ;  whether  or  not  this  is  allowable,  naturally  depends
upon  the  field  equations  of  gravitation,  that  is,  it  de¬
pends  upon  whether  or  not  this  quantity  satisfies,  to  a
first  approximation,  the  same  laws  of  the  field  as  the


90  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


gravitational  potential  in  Newton’s  theory.  A  glance
at  (90)  and  (90a)  shows  that  the  Tjh  actually  do  play
the  role  of  the  intensity  of  the  gravitational  field.
These  quantities  do  not  have  a  tensor  character.

Equations  (90)  express  the  influence  of  inertia  and
gravitation  upon  the  material  particle.  The  unity  of
inertia  and  gravitation  is  formally  expressed  by  the  fact
that  the  whole  left-hand  side  of  (90)  has  the  character
of  a  tensor  (with  respect  to  any  transformation  of  co¬
ordinates),  but  the  two  terms  taken  separately  do  not
have  tensor  character,  so  that,  in  analogy  with  Newton’s
equations,  the  first  term  would  be  regarded  as  the  ex¬
pression  for  inertia,  and  the  second  as  the  expression
for  the  gravitational  force.

We  must  next  attempt  to  find  the  laws  of  the  gravita¬
tional  field.  For  this  purpose,  Poisson’s  equation,

A<£  =  \irKp

of  the  Newtonian  theory  must  serve  as  a  model.  This
equation  has  its  foundation  in  the  idea  that  the  gravi¬
tational  field  arises  from  the  density  p  of  ponderable
matter.  It  must  also  be  so  in  the  general  theory  of
relativity.  But  our  investigations  of  the  special  theory
of  relativity  have  shown  that  in  place  of  the  scalar
density  of  matter  we  have  the  tensor  of  energy  per  unit
volume.  In  the  latter  is  included  not  only  the  tensor
of  the  energy  of  ponderable  matter,  but  also  that  of  the
electromagnetic  energy.  We  have  seen,  indeed,  that
in  a  more  complete  analysis  the  energy  tensor  can  be
regarded  only  as  a  provisional  means  of  representing


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


91


matter.  In  reality,  matter  consists  of  electrically  charged
particles,  and  is  to  be  regarded  itself  as  a  part,  in  fact,
the  principal  part,  of  the  electromagnetic  field.  It  is
only  the  circumstance  that  we  have  not  sufficient  know¬
ledge  of  the  electromagnetic  field  of  concentrated  charges
that  compels  us,  provisionally,  to  leave  undetermined
in  presenting  the  theory,  the  true  form  of  this  tensor.
From  this  point  of  view  our  problem  now  is  to  introduce
a  tensor,  T^,  of  the  second  rank,  whose  structure  we  do
not  know  provisionally,  and  which  includes  in  itself  the
energy  density  of  the  electromagnetic  field  and  of  ponder¬
able  matter ;  we  shall  denote  this  in  the  following  as
the  “  energy  tensor  of  matter.”

According  to  our  previous  results,  the  principles  of
momentum  and  energy  are  expressed  by  the  statement
that  the  divergence  of  this  tensor  vanishes  (47c).  In
the  general  theory  of  relativity,  we  shall  have  to  assume
as  valid  the  corresponding  general  co-variant  equation.
If  (T^v)  denotes  the  co-variant  energy  tensor  of  matter,
XKJ.  the  corresponding  mixed  tensor  density,  then,  in
accordance  with  (83),  we  must  require  that


o  =


(95)


be  satisfied.  It  must  be  remembered  that  besides  the
energy  density  of  the  matter  there  must  also  be  given
an  energy  density  of  the  gravitational  field,  so  that  there
can  be  no  talk  of  principles  of  conservation  of  energy
and  momentum  for  matter  alone.  This  is  expressed
mathematically  by  the  presence  of  the  second  term  in


92  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


(95),  which  makes  it  impossible  to  conclude  the  existence
of  an  integral  equation  of  the  form  of  (49).  The  gravi¬
tational  field  transfers  energy  and  momentum  to  the
“matter,”  in  that  it  exerts  forces  upon  it  and  gives  it
energy;  this  is  expressed  by  the  second  term  in  (95).

If  there  is  an  analogue  of  Poisson’s  equation  in  the
general  theory  of  relativity,  then  this  equation  must  be
a  tensor  equation  for  the  tensor  g^v  of  the  gravitational
potential ;  the  energy  tensor  of  matter  must  appear  on
the  right-hand  side  of  this  equation.  On  the  left-hand
side  of  the  equation  there  must  be  a  differential  tensor
in  the  g^v.  We  have  to  find  this  differential  tensor.
It  is  completely  determined  by  the  following  three
conditions : —

1.  It  may  contain  no  differential  coefficients  of  the^
higher  than  the  second.

2.  It  must  be  linear  and  homogeneous  in  these  second
differential  coefficients.

3.  Its  divergence  must  vanish  identically.

The  first  two  of  these  conditions  are  naturally  taken
from  Poisson’s  equation.  Since  it  may  be  proved
mathematically  that  all  such  differential  tensors  can  be
formed  algebraically  (i.e.  without  differentiation)  from
Riemann’s  tensor,  our  tensor  must  be  of  the  form

Kv  +

in  which  R^v  and  R  are  defined  by  (88)  and  (89)  respec¬
tively.  Further,  it  may  be  proved  that  the  third  condi¬
tion  requires  a  to  have  the  value  -  For  the  law


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  93


of  the  gravitational  field  we  therefore  get  the  equa¬
tion

Equation  (95)  is  a  consequence  of  this  equation,  tc  de¬
notes  a  constant,  which  is  connected  with  the  Newtonian
gravitation  constant.

In  the  following  I  shall  indicate  the  features  of  the
theory  which  are  interesting  from  the  point  of  view  of
physics,  using  as  little  as  possible  of  the  rather  involved
mathematical  method.  It  must  first  be  shown  that  the
divergence  of  the  left-hand  side  actually  vanishes.  The
energy  principle  for  matter  may  be  expressed,  by  (83),


0  -  £  -


in  which


Z",  =  -


S-


(97)


The  analogous  operation,  applied  to  the  left-hand  side
of  (96),  will  lead  to  an  identity.

In  the  region  surrounding  each  world-point  there  are
systems  of  co-ordinates  for  which,  choosing  the  ^^-co¬
ordinate  imaginary,  at  the  given  point,


-  g*  =  _  =  o  if  ^  ={=  V)

and  for  which  the  first  derivatives  of  the  g^v  and  the
g*v  vanish.  We  shall  verify  the  vanishing  of  the  diverg¬
ence  of  the  left-hand  side  at  this  point.  At  this  point
the  components  T^a  vanish,  so  that  we  have  to  prove
the  vanishing  only  of


94  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY

Introducing  (88)  and  (70)  into  this  expression,  we  see
that  the  only  terms  that  remain  are  those  in  which  third
derivatives  of  the  g^v  enter.  Since  the  g  are  to  be
replaced  by  -  we  obtain,  finally,  only  a  few  terms
which  may  easily  be  seen  to  cancel  each  other.  Since
the  quantity  that  we  have  formed  has  a  tensor  character,
its  vanishing  is  proved  for  every  other  system  of  co-ordin¬
ates  also,  and  naturally  for  every  other  four-dimensional
point.  The  energy  principle  of  matter  (97)  is  thus  a
mathematical  consequence  of  the  field  equations  (96).

In  order  to  learn  whether  the  equations  (96)  are
consistent  with  experience,  we  must,  above  all  else,  find
out  whether  they  lead  to  the  Newtonian  theory  as  a
first  approximation.  For  this  purpose  we  must  intro¬
duce  various  approximations  into  these  equations.  We
already  know  that  Euclidean  geometry  and  the  law  of  the
constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  are  valid,  to  a  certain
approximation,  in  regions  of  a  great  extent,  as  in  the
planetary  system.  If,  as  in  the  special  theory  of  rela¬
tivity,  we  take  the  fourth  co-ordinate  imaginary,  this
means  that  we  must  put

~  ~~  y^v  •  •  •  (9^)

in  which  the  y^v  are  so  small  compared  to  1  that  we
can  neglect  the  higher  powers  of  the  y ^  and  their
derivatives.  If  we  do  this,  we  learn  nothing  about  the
structure  of  the  gravitational  field,  or  of  metrical  space  of
cosmical  dimensions,  but  we  do  learn  about  the  influence
of  neighbouring  masses  upon  physical  phenomena.

Before  carrying  through  this  approximation  we  shall


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


05


transform  (96).  We  multiply  (96)  by  g*v,  summed  over
the  fi  and  v ;  observing  the  relation  which  follows  from
the  definition  of  the  g^,

=  4

we  obtain  the  equation

R  =  /cgllvTflv  =  kT.

If  we  put  this  value  of  R  in  (96)  we  obtain

=  -  k{T^  -  =  -  tcTl,.  .  (96a)

When  the  approximation  which  has  been  mentioned  is
carried  out,  we  obtain  for  the  left-hand  side,

+  'dxy^xv  dxyZxa  ^xg)xj
or

l3^-  ,  3  ■  3  va\

7  ix*  5.ra  /  2  J.ra  /

in  which  has  been  put

y  h-v  ~  y^v  ~  \y •  •  (99)

We  must  now  note  that  equation  (96)  is  valid  for  any
system  of  co-ordinates.  We  have  already  specialized  the
system  of  co-ordinates  in  that  we  have  chosen  it  so  that
within  the  region  considered  the  g^v  differ  infinitely  little
from  the  constant  values  -  8^.  But  this  condition
remains  satisfied  in  any  infinitesimal  change  of  co¬
ordinates,  so  that  there  are  still  four  conditions  to  which
the  may  be  subjected,  provided  these  conditions  do
not  conflict  with  the  conditions  for  the  order  of  magnitude


96  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


of  the  y^.  We  shall  now  assume  that  the  system  of  co¬
ordinates  is  so  chosen  that  the  four  relations —

_  l-i-v  ~^y  iav  i^ycrcr

~  ~dXv  “  1xv  2  IXp.
are  satisfied.  Then  (96a)  takes  the  form

=  2 *t%  .  .  .  (96b)

These  equations  may  be  solved  by  the  method,  familiar
in  electrodynamics,  of  retarded  potentials;  we  get,  in  an
easily  understood  notation,


y  ixv


f  9V  f  ~  r)JV
27rJ  r  "  (


(101)


In  order  to  see  in  what  sense  this  theory  contains  the
Newtonian  theory,  we  must  consider  in  greater  detail
the  energy  tensor  of  matter.  Considered  phenomeno¬
logically,  this  energy  tensor  is  composed  of  that  of  the
electromagnetic  field  and  of  matter  in  the  narrower  sense.
If  we  consider  the  different  parts  of  this  energy  tensor
with  respect  to  their  order  of  magnitude,  it  follows
from  the  results  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity  that
the  contribution  of  the  electromagnetic  field  practically
vanishes  in  comparison  to  that  of  ponderable  matter.  In
our  system  of  units,  the  energy  of  one  gram  of  matter  is
equal  to  I,  compared  to  which  the  energy  of  the  electric
fields  may  be  ignored,  and  also  the  energy  of  deformation
of  matter,  and  even  the  chemical  energy.  We  get  an
approximation  that  is  fully  sufficient  for  our  purpose  if


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  97


we  put

dx„  dxv  1

^  ■*[

ds2  =  g^dxjx  J


In  this,  <j  is  the  density  at  rest,  that  is,  the  density  of  the
ponderable  matter,  in  the  ordinary  sense,  measured  with
the  aid  of  a  unit  measuring  rod,  and  referred  to  a  Galilean
system  of  co-ordinates  moving  with  the  matter.

We  observe,  further,  that  in  the  co-ordinates  we  have
chosen,  we  shall  make  only  a  relatively  small  error  if  we
replace  the  g^v  by  -  8^,  so  that  we  put


ds 2  =  -  ^dx2.  .  .  (102a)

The  previous  developments  are  valid  however  rapidly
the  masses  which  generate  the  field  may  move  relatively
to  our  chosen  system  of  quasi-Galilean  co-ordinates.  But
in  astronomy  we  have  to  do  with  masses  whose  velocities,
relatively  to  the  co-ordinate  system  employed,  are  always
small  compared  to  the  velocity  of  light,  that  is,  small
compared  to  i,  with  our  choice  of  the  unit  of  time.
We  therefore  get  an  approximation  which  is  sufficient
for  nearly  all  practical  purposes  if  in  (ioi)  we  replace
the  retarded  potential  by  the  ordinary  (non-retarded)
potential,  and  if,  for  the  masses  which  generate  the  field,
we  put


_  dx.j,  dx 3  dx±  ./  —  \dl  -

ds  ds  ~  ds  ~  | ds  ~  =  ^  ~  I’  (I03a)


7


98  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


Then  we  get  for  and  Tnv  the  values


o

o

o

o


o  o

o  o

o  o

o  o


o

o

o

<J


l

I


(104)


For  T  we  get  the  value  cr,  and,  finally,  for  T*„  the
values,


a

2

o

o


o

<7

2

O


o  o

We  thus  get,  from  (10 1),
7ll  =  722  =  733  =


o

o

cr

2

O  -


O

O

O

o  I
2J


744  =  +


K

'odVQ\

47 T.

r

K

m<rdV0

477.

r  J

(104a)


(101a)


while  all  the  other  y^v  vanish.  The  least  of  these  equa¬
tions,  in  connexion  with  equation  (90a),  contains  New¬
ton’s  theory  of  gravitation.  If  we  replace  /  by  ct  we

get

drx  kc 2  7)  ff odV0[

~df  ~  J


We  see  that  the  Newtonian  gravitation  constant  W,  is
connected  with  the  constant  tc  that  enters  into  our  field
equations  by  the  relation


K  =


fCC1

877'


(105)


99


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


From  the  known  numerical  value  of  K ,  it  therefore
follows  that


k  =


877 K  877 . 6-67  .  10


-8


r


9  .  10


20


1  -86  .  1  o~27.  (105a)


From  (10 1 )  we  see  that  even  in  the  first  approximation
the  structure  of  the  gravitational  field  differs  fundamentally
from  that  which  is  consistent  with  the  Newtonian  theory  ;
this  difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  gravitational
potential  has  the  character  of  a  tensor  and  not  a  scalar.
This  was  not  recognized  in  the  past  because  only  the
component  g 44,  to  a  first  approximation,  enters  the  equa¬
tions  of  motion  of  material  particles.

In  order  now  to  be  able  to  judge  the  behaviour  of
measuring  rods  and  clocks  from  our  results,  we  must
observe  the  following.  According  to  the  principle  of
equivalence,  the  metrical  relations  of  the  Euclidean
geometry  are  valid  relatively  to  a  Cartesian  system  of
reference  of  infinitely  small  dimensions,  and  in  a  suitable
state  of  motion  (freely  failing,  and  without  rotation).
We  can  make  the  same  statement  for  local  systems  of
co-ordinates  which,  relatively  to  these,  have  small  ac¬
celerations,  and  therefore  for  such  systems  of  co-ordinates
as  are  at  rest  relatively  to  the  one  we  have  selected.  For
such  a  local  system,  we  have,  for  two  neighbouring  point
events,

ds2  =  -  dX2  -  dX2  -  dX2  +  dT2  =  -  dS 2  +  dT2

where  dS  is  measured  directly  by  a  measuring  rod  and
dT  by  a  clock  at  rest  relatively  to  the  system  :  these  are


100  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


the  naturally  measured  lengths  and  times.  Since  ds\  on
the  other  hand,  is  known  in  terms  of  the  co-ordinates  xv
employed  in  finite  regions,  in  the  form


ds-  =  g^dx^dx.


we  have  the  possibility  of  getting  the  relation  between
naturally  measured  lengths  and  times,  on  the  one  hand,
and  the  corresponding  differences  of  co-ordinates,  on  the
other  hand.  As  the  division  into  space  and  time  is  in
agreement  with  respect  to  the  two  systems  of  co-ordinates,
so  when  we  equate  the  two  expressions  for  ds2  we  get
two  relations.  If,  by  (ioia),  we  put


we  obtain,  to  a  sufficiently  close  approximation,


(i°6)


The  unit  measuring  rod  has  therefore  the  length,


in  respect  to  the  system  of  co-ordinates  we  have  selected.
The  particular  system  of  co-ordinates  we  have  selected


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


101


insures  that  this  length  shall  depend  only  upon
the  place,  and  not  upon  the  direction.  If  we  had
chosen  a  different  system  of  co-ordinates  this  would  not
be  so.  But  however  we  may  choose  a  system  of  co¬
ordinates,  the  laws  of  configuration  of  rigid  rods  do  not
agree  with  those  of  Euclidean  geometry  ;  in  other  words,
we  cannot  choose  any  system  of  co-ordinates  so  that  the
co-ordinate  differences,  Axl}  Ax2,  Axs,  corresponding  to  the
ends  of  a  unit  measuring  rod,  oriented  in  any  way,  shall
always  satisfy  the  relation  Ax}  +  Ax}  +  Ax-}  =  i.  In
this  sense  space  is  not  Euclidean,  but  “  curved. ”  It
follows  from  the  second  of  the  relations  above  that  the
interval  between  two  beats  of  the  unit  clock  ( dT  =  i)
corresponds  to  the  “  time  ”


in  the  unit  used  in  our  system  of  co-ordinates.  The  rate
of  a  clock  is  accordingly  slower  the  greater  is  the  mass  of
the  ponderable  matter  in  its  neighbourhood.  We  there¬
fore  conclude  that  spectral  lines  which  are  produced  on
the  sun’s  surface  will  be  displaced  towards  the  red,
compared  to  the  corresponding  lines  produced  on  the
earth,  by  about  2.  io~°  of  their  wave-lengths.  At  first,
this  important  consequence  of  the  theory  appeared  to
conflict  with  experiment ;  but  results  obtained  during  the
past  year  seem  to  make  the  existence  of  this  effect  more
probable,  and  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  this  con¬
sequence  of  the  theory  will  be  confirmed  within  the  next
year.


102  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


Another  important  consequence  of  the  theory,  which
can  be  tested  experimentally,  has  to  do  with  the  path  of
rays  of  light.  In  the  general  theory  of  relativity  also
the  velocity  of  light  is  everywhere  the  same,  relatively  to
a  local  inertial  system.  This  velocity  is  unity  in  our
natural  measure  of  time.  The  law  of  the  propagation  of
light  in  general  co-ordinates  is  therefore,  according  to  the
general  theory  of  relativity,  characterized,  by  the  equation

ds2  =  o.


To  within  the  approximation  which  we  are  using,  and  in
the  system  of  co-ordinates  which  we  have  selected,  the
velocity  of  light  is  characterized,  according  to  (106),  by
the  equation


(


I  +


q*  dx<£  q-  dxd


The  velocity  of  light  A,  is  therefore  expressed  in  our
co-ordinates  by


v/  dx2  q-  dx2  q-  dx2
~dl


k  [crdVr,  ,  v

—  — -*•  (I07)

47tJ  r


We  can  therefore  draw  the  conclusion  from  this,  that  a
ray  of  light  passing  near  a  large  mass  is  deflected.  If
we  imagine  the  sun,  of  mass  M ,  concentrated  at  the
origin  of  our  system  of  co-ordinates,  then  a  ray  of  light,
travelling  parallel  to  the  ^3-axis,  in  the  x1  -  xs  plane,
at  a  distance  A  from  the  origin,  will  be  deflected,  in  all,
by  an  amount


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


103


+  »

f 1  ,

a  =  —  —ax^

JL  dxx


towards  the  sun.


On  performing  the  integration  we  get

kM


a


27tA


(ioS)


The  existence  of  this  deflection,  which  amounts  to
i  7 "  for  A  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  sun,  was  confirmed,
with  remarkable  accuracy,  by  the  English  Solar  Eclipse
.  Expedition  in  1919,  and  most  careful  preparations  have
been  made  to  get  more  exact  observational  data  at  the
solar  eclipse  in  1922.  It  should  be  noted  that  this
result,  also,  of  the  theory  is  not  influenced  by  our
arbitrary  choice  of  a  system  of  co-ordinates.

This  is  the  place  to  speak  of  the  third  consequence  of
the  theory  which  can  be  tested  by  observation,  namely,
that  which  concerns  the  motion  of  the  perihelion
of  the  planet  Mercury.  The  secular  changes  in  the
planetary  orbits  are  known  with  such  accuracy  that  the
approximation  we  have  been  using  is  no  longer  sufficient
for  a  comparison  of  theory  and  observation.  It  is  neces¬
sary  to  go  back  to  the  general  field  equations  (96).  To
solve  this  problem  I  made  use  of  the  method  of  succes¬
sive  approximations.  Since  then,  however,  the  problem
of  the  central  symmetrical  statical  gravitational  field  has
been  completely  solved  by  Schwarzschild  and  others ;
the  derivation  given  by  H.  Weyl  in  his  book,  “  Raum-
Zeit-Materie,”  is  particularly  elegant.  The  calculation
can  be  simplified  somewhat  if  we  do  not  go  back  directly


104  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


to  the  equation  (96),  but  base  it  upon  a  principle  of
variation  that  is  equivalent  to  this  equation.  I  shall
indicate  the  procedure  only  in  so  far  as  is  necessary  for
understanding  the  method.

In  the  case  of  a  statical  field,  ds2  must  have  the  form

1 ds2  =  -  dc r2  +  f2dx±

da-  =  ^Yapdxjxp
1-3

where  the  summation  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  last
equation  is  to  be  extended  over  the  space  variables  only,
The  central  symmetry  of  the  field  requires  the  y^v  to  be
of  the  form,

Ya£  =  /^a/3  +  '^X0X) 3  *  *  ( 1  1  °)

f  2,  n  and  \  are  functions  of  r  —  ^/x2  +  x£  +  xz2  only.
One  of  these  three  functions  can  be  chosen  arbitrarily,
because  our  system  of  co-ordinates  is,  a  priori ,  completely
arbitrary  ;  for  by  a  substitution

^4  =  *4

V«  =  F(r)xa

we  can  always  insure  that  one  of  these  three  functions
shall  be  an  assigned  function  of  r.  In  place  of  (i  io)  we
can  therefore  put,  without  limiting  the  generality,

7a£  =  ^  a  8  +  .  .  (uoa)

In  this  way  the  g^v  are  expressed  in  terms  of  the  two
quantities  \  and  f.  These  are  to  be  determined  as  func¬
tions  of  r,  by  introducing  them  into  equation  (96),  after


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


105


first  calculating  the  from  (107)  and  (108a).  We
have


-L  afi


r4

1 44

r4

1  4a


+  2\r8ap


—  u


r  I+^r-^(fora,A^  =  1,2,3)
r“3  =  =  o  (for  a,  /3  =  I,  2,  3)

-2y2


—  if


=  -  */


-2¥!


(108b)


With  the  help  of  these  results,  the  field  equations
furnish  Schwarzschild’s  solution  :


ds2  =


“  dr2
A

1 -

r


4-  r2(sin2  0dcf)2  +  d02)


in  which  we  have  put


(109)


xA  =  l

4

xY  =  r  sin  6  sin  (p
x.2  =  r  sin  0  cos  </>
xz  =  r  cos  0


A  =


kM

47 r


(109a)


M  denotes  the  sun’s  mass,  centrally  symmetrically
placed  about  the  origin  of  co-ordinates  ;  the  solution  (109)
is  valid  only  outside  of  this  mass,  where  all  the  T^v  vanish.
If  the  motion  of  the  planet  takes  place  in  the  x1  -  x.2
plane  then  we  must  replace  (109)  by

/  A  \  dv2

ds 2  —  [1  -  -yjdl2  -  - ^  -  r2d(p2  .  (109b)

1  -  —
r


106  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


The  calculation  of  the  planetary  motion  depends  upon
equation  (90).  From  the  first  of  equations  (108b)  and
(90)  we  get,  for  the  indices  1,  2,  3,

d  (  dxp  dx  \
ds\X * ds  ~  x*ds)  ~°


or,  if  we  integrate,  and  express  the  result  in  polar  co¬
ordinates,


d(p

r =  constant.


(no


From  (90),  for  jj,  =  4,  we  get

dr  l  I  df 2  dxa  dr  l  I  df~
0  ds 2  +  f'1  dxa  ds  ~  ds 2  +  f2  ds'


From  this,  after  multiplication  by /2  and  integration,  we

have


=  constant.


(1 1 2)


In  (109b),  (ill)  and  (112)  we  have  three  equations
between  the  four  variables  j,  r,  /  and  </>,  from  which  the
motion  of  the  planet  may  be  calculated  in  the  same  way
as  in  classical  mechanics.  The  most  important  result  we
get  from  this  is  a  secular  rotation  of  the  elliptic  orbit  of
the  planet  in  the  same  sense  as  the  revolution  of  the
planet,  amounting  in  radians  per  revolution  to


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  107


where

a  =  the  semi-major  axis  of  the  planetary  orbit  in
centimetres.

e  =  the  numerical  eccentricity.

c  =  3  .  io+10,  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacuo .

T  =  the  period  of  revolution  in  seconds.

This  expression  furnishes  the  explanation  of  the  motion
of  the  perihelion  of  the  planet  Mercury,  which  has  been
known  for  a  hundred  years  (since  Leverrier),  and  for
which  theoretical  astronomy  has  hitherto  been  unable
satisfactorily  to  account.

There  is  no  difficulty  in  expressing  Maxwell’s  theory
of  the  electromagnetic  field  in  terms  of  the  general  theory
of  relativity ;  this  is  done  by  application  of  the  tensor
formation  (8 1 ),  (82)  and  (77).  Let  (p ^  be  a  tensor  of  the
first  rank,  to  be  denoted  as  an  electromagnetic  4-potential ;
then  an  electromagnetic  field  tensor  may  be  defined  by
the  relations,


^<j>u

He’


(”4)


The  second  of  Maxwell’s  systems  of  equations  is  then
defined  by  the  tensor  equation,  resulting  from  this,


T>x,


(114a)


and  the  first  of  Maxwell’s  systems  of  equations  is  defined
by  the  tensor-density  relation


108  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


in  which


fl*”  =  V  -  gg^g1^

J  s  SPds ■


(XT


If  we  introduce  the  energy  tensor  of  the  electromagnetic
field  into  the  right-hand  side  of  (96),  we  obtain  (1 1 5),
for  the  special  case  3^  =  o,  as  a  consequence  of  (96)  by
taking  the  divergence.  This  inclusion  of  the  theory  of
electricity  in  the  scheme  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity
has  been  considered  arbitrary  and  unsatisfactory  by
many  theoreticians.  Nor  can  we  in  this  way  conceive  of
the  equilibrium  of  the  electricity  which  constitutes  the
elementary  electrically  charged  particles.  A  theory  in
which  the  gravitational  field  and  the  electromagnetic  field
enter  as  an  essential  entity  would  be  much  preferable.
H.  Weyl,  and  recently  Th.  Kaluza,  have  discovered  some
ingenious  theorems  along  this  direction ;  but  concerning
them,  I  am  convinced  that  they  do  not  bring  us  nearer  to
the  true  solution  of  the  fundamental  problem.  I  shall
not  go  into  this  further,  but  shall  give  a  brief  discussion
of  the  so-called  cosmological  problem,  for  without  this,
the  considerations  regarding  the  general  theory  of  rela¬
tivity  would,  in  a  certain  sense,  remain  unsatisfactory.

Our  previous  considerations,  based  upon  the  field
equations  (96),  had  for  a  foundation  the  conception  that
space  on  the  whole  is  Galilean-Euclidean,  and  that  this
character  is  disturbed  only  by  masses  embedded  in  it.
This  conception  was  certainly  justified  as  long  as  we  were
dealing  with  spaces  of  the  order  of  magnitude  of  those


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


109


that  astronomy  has  to  do  with.  But  whether  portions  of
the  universe,  however  large  they  may  be,  are  quasi-
Euclidean,  is  a  wholly  different  question.  We  can  make
this  clear  by  using  an  example  from  the  theory  of  surfaces
which  we  have  employed  many  times.  If  a  portion  of  a
surface  is  observed  by  the  eye  to  be  practically  plane,  it
does  not  at  all  follow  that  the  whole  surface  has  the  form
of  a  plane  ;  the  surface  might  just  as  well  be  a  sphere,  for
example,  of  sufficiently  large  radius.  The  question  as  to
whether  the  universe  as  a  whole  is  non-Euclidean  was
much  discussed  from  the  geometrical  point  of  view  before
the  development  of  the  theory  of  relativity.  But  with  the
theory  of  relativity,  this  problem  has  entered  upon  a
new  stage,  for  according  to  this  theory  the  geometrical
properties  of  bodies  are  not  independent,  but  depend
upon  the  distribution  of  masses.

If  the  universe  were  quasi-Euclidean,  then  Mach  was
wholly  wrong  in  his  thought  that  inertia,  as  well  as
gravitation,  depends  upon  a  kind  of  mutual  action  between
bodies.  For  in  this  case,  with  a  suitably  selected  system
of  co-ordinates,  the  g^v  would  be  constant  at  infinity,  as
they  are  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  while  within
finite  regions  the  gixv  would  differ  from  these  constant
values  by  small  amounts  only,  with  a  suitable  choice  of
co-ordinates,  as  a  result  of  the  influence  of  the  masses  in
finite  regions.  The  physical  properties  of  space  would
not  then  be  wholly  independent,  that  is,  uninfluenced  by
matter,  but  in  the  main  they  would  be,  and  only  in
small  measure,  conditioned  by  matter.  Such  a  dualistic
conception  is  even  in  itself  not  satisfactory;  there  are,


110  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


however,  some  important  physical  arguments  against  it,
which  we  shall  consider.

The  hypothesis  that  the  universe  is  infinite  and
Euclidean  at  infinity,  is,  from  the  relativistic  point  of
view,  a  complicated  hypothesis.  In  the  language  of  the
general  theory  of  relativity  it  demands  that  the  Riemann
tensor  of  the  fourth  rank  R^imi  shall  vanish  at  infinity,
which  furnishes  twenty  independent  conditions,  while  only
ten  curvature  components  R  }  enter  into  the  laws  of  the
gravitational  field.  It  is  certainly  unsatisfactory  to
postulate  such  a  far-reaching  limitation  without  any
physical  basis  for  it.

But  in  the  second  place,  the  theory  of  relativity  makes
it  appear  probable  that  Mach  was  on  the  right  road  in
his  thought  that  inertia  depends  upon  a  mutual  action  of
matter.  For  we  shall  show  in  the  following  that,  accord¬
ing  to  our  equations,  inert  masses  do  act  upon  each  other
in  the  sense  of  the  relativity  of  inertia,  even  if  only  very
feebly.  What  is  to  be  expected  along  the  line  of  Mach’s
thought  ?

1.  The  inertia  of  a  body  must  increase  when  ponder¬

able  masses  are  piled  up  in  its  neighbourhood.

2.  A  body  must  experience  an  accelerating  force  when

neighbouring  masses  are  accelerated,  and,  in  fact,
the  force  must  be  in  the  same  direction  as  the
acceleration.

3.  A  rotating  hollow  body  must  generate  inside  of

itself  a  “  Coriolis  field,”  which  deflects  moving
bodies  in  the  sense  of  the  rotation,  and  a  radial
centrifugal  field  as  well.


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


111


We  shall  now  show  that  these  three  effects,  which  are
to  be  expected  in  accordance  with  Mach’s  ideas,  are
actually  present  according  to  our  theory,  although  their
magnitude  is  so  small  that  confirmation  of  them  by
laboratory  experiments  is  not  to  be  thought  of.  For  this
purpose  we  shall  go  back  to  the  equations  of  motion  of
a  material  particle  (90),  and  carry  the  approximations
somewhat  further  than  was  done  in  equation  (90a).

First,  we  consider  y4l  as  small  of  the  first  order.  The
square  of  the  velocity  of  masses  moving  under  the  influence
of  the  gravitational  force  is  of  the  same  order,  according
to  the  energy  equation.  It  is  therefore  logical  to  regard
the  velocities  of  the  material  particles  we  are  considering,
as  well  as  the  velocities  of  the  masses  which  generate  the
field,  as  small,  of  the  order  -J.  We  shall  now  carry  out  the
approximation  in  the  equations  that  arise  from  the  field
equations  (101)  and  the  equations  of  motion  (90)  so  far
as  to  consider  terms,  in  the  second  member  of  (90),  that
are  linear  in  those  velocities.  Further,  we  shall  not  put
ds  and  dl  equal  to  each  other,  but,  corresponding  to  the
higher  approximation,  we  shall  put

ds  =  JFJi  =  0  ~


From  (90)  we  obtain,  at  first,


+


744\^

2  )  dl  J


TV*
1  a/3


dx„  dx


dl


a  dxj  y44\  ,

+  fMIl6>


From  (1 01)  we  get,  to  the  approximation  sought  for,


112  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


Yu


722  =


733  =  744

K  |  o

47rJ

i  x

C  dx0

74a  =  -

2

G  ds

Y«0  =  0

J

/

r


(i  17)


in  which,  in  (1 17),  a  and  /3  denote  the  space  indices  only.
On  the  right-hand  side  of  (116)  we  can  replace

r/

1  +2 'by  1  and  -  I7  by  [“/].  It  is  easy  to  see,  in

addition,  that  to  this  degree  of  approximation  we  must
put

M  =


ail  _  1  P>V*


[;4]  -
[f]  -  °


4a


cXtr


'bx,


p- 1


in  which  a,  /3  and  fi  denote  space  indices.  We  therefore
obtain  from  (116),  in  the  usual  vector  notation,


d  _  ^B

.1  +  <J>]  =  grad  a-  +  +  [rot  B,  v]


k  |WF0


H  =


8ttJ  r

K  r«%dv.


\.  (1 18)


dl


0


The  equations  of  motion,  (i  1 8),  show  now,  in  fact,  that


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  113


1.  The  inert  mass  is  proportional  to  I  +  a,  and

therefore  increases  when  ponderable  masses
approach  the  test  body.

2.  There  is  an  inductive  action  of  accelerated  masses,

of  the  same  sign,  upon  the  test  body.  This  is

,  m

the  term

3.  A  material  particle,  moving  perpendicularly  to  the

axis  of  rotation  inside  a  rotating  hollow  body,
is  deflected  in  the  sense  of  the  rotation  (Coriolis
field).  The  centrifugal  action,  mentioned  above,
inside  a  rotating  hollow  body,  also  follows  from
the  theory,  as  has  been  shown  by  Thirring.*

Although  all  of  these  effects  are  inaccessible  to  experi¬
ment,  because  k  is  so  small,  nevertheless  they  certainly
exist  according  to  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  We
must  see  in  them  a  strong  support  for  Mach’s  ideas  as  to
the  relativity  of  all  inertial  actions.  If  we  think  these
ideas  consistently  through  to  the  end  we  must  expect  the
whole  inertia,  that  is,  the  whole  ^-field,  to  be  determined
by  the  matter  of  the  universe,  and  not  mainly  by  the
boundary  conditions  at  infinity.

For  a  satisfactory  conception  of  the  ^,,-field  of  cosmical
dimensions,  the  fact  seems  to  be  of  significance  that  the
relative  velocity  of  the  stars  is  small  compared  to  the
velocity  of  light.  It  follows  from  this  that,  with  a  suit-

*  That  the  centrifugal  action  must  be  inseparably  connected  with  the
existence  of  the  Coriolis  field  may  be  recognized,  even  without  calculation,
in  the  special  case  of  a  co-ordinate  system  rotating  uniformly  relatively  to
an  inertial  system  ;  our  general  co-variant  equations  naturally  must  apply
to  such  a  case.

8


114  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


able  choice  of  co-ordinates,  gu  is  nearly  constant  in  the
universe,  at  least,  in  that  part  of  the  universe  in  which
there  is  matter.  The  assumption  appears  natural,  more¬
over,  that  there  are  stars  in  all  parts  of  the  universe,  so
that  we  may  well  assume  that  the  inconstancy  of  g^
depends  only  upon  the  circumstance  that  matter  is  not
distributed  continuously,  but  is  concentrated  in  single
celestial  bodies  and  systems  of  bodies.  If  we  are  willing
to  ignore  these  more  local  non-uniformities  of  the  density
of  matter  and  of  the  ^-field,  in  order  to  learn  something
of  the  geometrical  properties  of  the  universe  as  a  whole,
it  appears  natural  to  substitute  for  the  actual  distribution
of  masses  a  continuous  distribution,  and  furthermore  to
assign  to  this  distribution  a  uniform  density  a.  In  this
imagined  universe  all  points  with  space  directions  will
be  geometrically  equivalent ;  with  respect  to  its  space
extension  it  will  have  a  constant  curvature,  and  will  be
cylindrical  with  respect  to  its  ^4-co-ordinate.  The  pos¬
sibility  seems  to  be  particularly  satisfying  that  the  universe
is  spatially  bounded  and  thus,  in  accordance  with  our
assumption  of  the  constancy  of  a,  is  of  constant  curvature,
being  either  spherical  or  elliptical ;  for  then  the  boundary
conditions  at  infinity  which  are  so  inconvenient  from  the
standpoint  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  may  be
replaced  by  the  much  more  natural  conditions  for  a  closed
surface.

According  to  what  has  been  said,  we  are  to  put

ds1  =  dx£  -  7 [).vdxgixv  .  .  (i  1 9)

in  which  the  indices  fi  and  v  run  from  1  to  3  only.  The


115


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


7M„  will  be  such  functions  of  xx,  x 2,  xz  as  correspond
to  a  three-dimensional  continuum  of  constant  positive
curvature.  We  must  now  investigate  whether  such  an
assumption  can  satisfy  the  field  equations  of  gravitation.

In  order  to  be  able  to  investigate  this,  we  must  first
find  what  differential  conditions  the  three-dimensional
manifold  of  constant  curvature  satisfies.  A  spherical
manifold  of  three  dimensions,  embedded  in  a  Euclidean
continuum  of  four  dimensions,*  is  given  by  the  equations


x\  +  x2  +  x./  +  x2  =  a 2
dx^  +  dx o2  +  dxd  +  dx2  =  ds1.


By  eliminating  xi}  we  get
ds1  —  dx±  +  dx2  +  dx22  +


(x1dxl  +  x2dx2  +  x-^dxj2
d 2  -  X2  -  x2  -  x 2


As  far  as  terms  of  the  third  and  higher  degrees  in  the
xv,  we  can  put,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  origin  of
co-ordinates,

ds1  =  (s„,  +  X-^)dxvdxv.


Inside  the  brackets  are  the  g^v  of  the  manifold  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  origin.  Since  the  first  derivatives
of  the  g^v,  and  therefore  also  the  Y vanish  at  the
origin,  the  calculation  of  the  R^v  for  this  manifold,  by
(88),  is  very  simple  at  the  origin.  We  have


2  <N  _  2

5  -  jgpr


*  The  aid  of  a  fourth  space  dimension  has  naturally  no  significance
except  that  of  a  mathematical  artifice.


116  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


2

Since  the  relation  is  universally  co-variant,

and  since  all  points  of  the  manifold  are  geometrically
equivalent,  this  relation  holds  for  every  system  of  co¬
ordinates,  and  everywhere  in  the  manifold.  In  order  to
avoid  confusion  with  the  four-dimensional  continuum,
we  shall,  in  the  following,  designate  quantities  that  refer
to  the  three-dimensional  continuum  by  Greek  letters,
and  put

2

P,uv  =  —  -tfnv  •  •  •  (i  20)

We  now  proceed  to  apply  the  field  equations  (96)  to
our  special  case.  From  (1 19)  we  get  for  the  four-dimen¬
sional  manifold,


R^v  =  PM„  for  the  indices  1  to  3

^14  =  ^24  =  ^34  =  ^44  =  O


(121)


For  the  right-hand  side  of  (96)  we  have  to  consider
the  energy  tensor  for  matter  distributed  like  a  cloud  of
dust.  According  to  what  has  gone  before  we  must
therefore  put


T>xv  =


dx,L  dxv
a — -  • —
ds  ds


specialized  for  the  case  of  rest.  But  in  addition,  we
shall  add  a  pressure  term  that  may  be  physically  estab¬
lished  as  follows.  Matter  consists  of  electrically  charged
particles.  On  the  basis  of  Maxwell’s  theory  these
cannot  be  conceived  of  as  electromagnetic  fields  free
from  singularities.  In  order  to  be  consistent  with  the


THE  GENERAL  THEORY


117


facts,  it  is  necessary  to  introduce  energy  terms,  not  con¬
tained  in  Maxwell’s  theory,  so  that  the  single  electric
particles  may  hold  together  in  spite  of  the  mutual  re¬
pulsions  between  their  elements,  charged  with  electricity
of  one  sign.  For  the  sake  of  consistency  with  this  fact,
Poincare  has  assumed  a  pressure  to  exist  inside  these
particles  which  balances  the  electrostatic  repulsion.  It
cannot,  however,  be  asserted  that  this  pressure  vanishes
outside  the  particles.  We  shall  be  consistent  with  this
circumstance  if,  in  our  phenomenological  presentation,
we  add  a  pressure  term.  This  must  not,  however,  be
confused  with  a  hydrodynamical  pressure,  as  it  serves
only  for  the  energetic  presentation  of  the  dynamical
relations  inside  matter.  In  this  sense  we  put


^  axa  ax  b  ,  \

T H.V  ~  ~  g^p.  •


In  our  special  case  we  have,  therefore,  to  put


T^v  =  y^p  (for  and  v  from  1  to  3)


!  =  -  y^y^p  +  cr  -  p  =  a  -  4/.


Observing  that  the  field  equation  (96)  may  be  written
in  the  form


R -  kg^T)

we  get  from  (96)  the  equations,


118  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY

From  this  follows


If  the  universe  is  quasi-Euclidean,  and  its  radius  of
curvature  therefore  infinite,  then  a  would  vanish.  But
it  is  improbable  that  the  mean  density  of  matter  in  the
universe  is  actually  zero ;  this  is  our  third  argument
against  the  assumption  that  the  universe  is  quasi-
Euclidean.  Nor  does  it  seem  possible  that  our  hypo¬
thetical  pressure  can  vanish  ;  the  physical  nature  of  this
pressure  can  be  appreciated  only  after  we  have  a  better
theoretical  knowledge  of  the  electromagnetic  field.
According  to  the  second  of  equations  (123)  the  radius,
a,  of  the  universe  is  determined  in  terms  of  the  total
mass,  M,  of  matter,  by  the  equation


Mk
47 r2


(124)


The  complete  dependence  of  the  geometrical  upon  the
physical  properties  becomes  clearly  apparent  by  means
of  this  equation.

Thus  we  may  present  the  following  arguments  against
the  conception  of  a  space-infinite,  and  for  the  conception
of  a  space-bounded,  universe  : —

I.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  theory  of  relativity,
the  condition  for  a  closed  surface  is  very  much  simpler
than  the  corresponding  boundary  condition  at  infinity
of  the  quasi-Euclidean  structure  of  the  universe.


THE  GENERAL  THEORY  119


2.  The  idea  that  Mach  expressed,  that  inertia  depends
upon  the  mutual  action  of  bodies,  is  contained,  to  a
first  approximation,  in  the  equations  of  the  theory  of
relativity ;  it  follows  from  these  equations  that  inertia
depends,  at  least  in  part,  upon  mutual  actions  between
masses.  As  it  is  an  unsatisfactory  assumption  to  make
that  inertia  depends  in  part  upon  mutual  actions,  and
in  part  upon  an  independent  property  of  space,  Mach’s
idea  gains  in  probability.  But  this  idea  of  Mach’s
corresponds  only  to  a  finite  universe,  bounded  in  space,
and  not  to  a  quasi-Euclidean,  infinite  universe.  From
the  standpoint  of  epistemology  it  is  more  satisfying  to
have  the  mechanical  properties  of  space  completely  de¬
termined  by  matter,  and  this  is  the  case  only  in  a  space-
bounded  universe.

3.  An  infinite  universe  is  possible  only  if  the  mean
density  of  matter  in  the  universe  vanishes.  Although
such  an  assumption  is  logically  possible,  it  is  less  prob¬
able  than  the  assumption  that  there  is  a  finite  mean
density  of  matter  in  the  universe.


INDEX


A

Accelerated  masses — inductive  ac¬
tion  of,  1 13.

Addition  and  subtraction  of  tensors,
*4-

—  theorem  of  velocities,  40.

B

Biot-Savart  force,  46.

C

Centrifugal  force,  67.

Clocks — moving,  39.

Compressible  viscous  fluid,  22.
Concept  of  space,  3.

- time,  30.

Conditions  of  orthogonality,  7.
Congruence — theorems  of,  3.
Conservation  principles,  55.
Continuum — four-dimensional,  33.
Contraction  of  tensors,  15.
Contra-variant  vectors,  72,

- tensors,  75.

Co-ordinates — preferred  systems  of,

8.

Co-variance  of  equation  of  contin¬
uity,  22.

Co-variant,  12  et  seq.

- vector,  72.

Criticism  of  principle  of  inertia,  65.
Criticisms  of  theory  of  relativity,  31.
Curvilinear  co-ordinates,  t8.

D

Differentiation  of  tensors,  76,  79.
Displacement  of  spectral  lines,  101.

8*


E

Energy  and  mass,  48,  51.

—  tensor  oi'  electromagnetic  field,

52.

—  —  of  matter,  56.

Equation  of  continuity — co-variance
of,  22.

Equations  of  motion  of  materia
particle,  52.

Equivalence  of  mass  and  energy,  51.
Equivalent  spaces  of  reference,  26.
Euclidean  geometry,  4.

F

Finiteness  of  universe,  no.

Fizeau,  29.

Four-dimensional  continuum,  33.
Four-vector,  43.

Fundamental  tensor,  74.

G

Galilean  regions,  65.

—  transformation,  28.

Gauss,  68.

Geodetic  lines,  86.

Geometry,  Euclidean,  4.
Gravitational  mass,  63.

Gravitation  constant,  98.

H

Homogeneity  of  space,  17.
Hydrodynamical  equations,  56.
Hypotheses  of  pre-relativity  physics,
77.


121


122  THE  MEANING  OF  RELATIVITY


Inductive  action  of  accelerated
masses,  113.

Inert  and  gravitational  mass — equal¬
ity  of,  63.

Invariant,  10  et  seq.

Isotropy  of  space,  17.

K

Kaluza,  108.

L

Levi-Civita,  77.

Light-cone,  42.

Light  ray — path  of,  102.

Light-time,  34.

Linear  orthogonal  transformation,  7.
Lorentz  electromotive  force,  46.

—  transformation,  32.

M

Mach,  62,  log,  no,  m,  113,  119.
Mass  and  Energy,  48,  51.

—  equality  of  gravitational  and

inert,  63.

—  gravitational,  63.

Maxwell’s  equations,  23.

Mercury — perihelion  of,  103,  107.
Michelson  and  Morley,  29.
Minkowski,  34,

Motion  of  particle — equations  of,  52.
Moving  measuring  rods  and  clocks,
39-

Multiplication  ol  tensors,  14.

N

Newtonian  gravitation  constant,  98.
O

Operations  on  tensors,  14  et  seq.
Orthogonality — conditions  of,  7.
Orthogonal  transformations — linear,
/•


P

Path  of  light  ray,  102.

Perihelion  of  Mercury,  103,  107.
Poisson’s  equation,  90.

Preferred  systems  of  co-ordinates,  8.
Pre-relativity  physics — hypotheses
of,  27.

Principle  of  equivalence,  64.

- inertia — criticism  of,  65.

Principles  of  conservation,  55.

R

Radius  of  Universe,  118.

Rank  of  tensor,  14.

Ray  of  light — path  of,  102.

Reference — space  of,  4.

Riemann,  72.

—  tensor,  82,  85,  no.

Rods  (measuring)  and  clocks  in  mo¬
tion,  39.

Rotation,  66.

S

Simultaneity,  17,  30.

Sitter,  2g.

Skew-symmetrical  tensor,  15.

Solar  Eclipse  expedition  (1919),  103.
Space — concept  of,  3.

—  homogeneity  of,  17.

—  Isotropy  of,  17.

Spaces  of  reference,  4  ;  equivalence
of,  26.

Special  Lorentz  transformation,  36.
Spectral  lines — displacement  of,  101.
Straightest  lines,  86.

Stress  tensor,  22.

Symmetrical  tensor,  15.

Systems  of  co-ordinates — preferred,

8.

T

Tensor,  12  et  seq,  72  et  seq.

—  Addition  and  subtraction  of,  14.

—  Contraction  of,  15.

—  Fundamental,  74.

—  Multiplication  of,  14.


INDEX


123


Tensor,  operations,  14  et  seq.

—  Rank  of,  14.

—  Symmetrical  and  Skew-symmet¬

rical,  15.

Tensors — formation  by  differenti¬
ation,  76.

Theorem  for  addition  of  velocities,
40.

Theorems  of  congruence,  3.

Theory  of  relativity,  criticisms  of,  31.
Thirring,  113.

Time-concept,  30.

Time-space  concept,  33.
Transformation — Galilean,  28.

—  Linear  orthogonal,  7.


U

Universe — finiteness  of,  no.

—  radius  of,  118.

V

Vector — co-variant,  72.

—  contra-variant,  72.

Velocities — addition  theorem  of,  40.
Viscous  compressible  fluid,  22.

W

Weyl,  77,  103,  108.


PRINTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  ABERDEEN
